,h

s
BrihatParasara

HoraSastra
of

MAIIARSHI PARASARA

rqfv rarrc ga

{QeqttT{rrq }<t {ilftm

vol, I

En'gI  isht  rans I ation,commenlary,
annotationa nd editing

by
R. SANTHANAM

Ranjan Publications
t 6 Ansari Road,D arya Ganj, 'ri

*li 
NewD elhi-lol oo2$ "aiul../

l{-^ ., \r* I



CONTENTS
Ch. Details Page

Prefaceb y translator l0

T, THE CR.EATIOT'I t7'

2. GREAT TNCARNATI)N| QF THE LORD) n
T PLANETARY CHARACTERSAND DESCRIPTION 24

Namoso f planets, benefics and malefics, planetary
; governancesc, abinet, complexions,d eitics, sex,c om-

pounds, castes, descriptiono f planets from Sun to
Ketu, Saptha Dhatus, Ritus, planetary tastes,s trc-
ngths, trees;D hatu, Moola & Jeevad ivisions, exalta-
tion and debilitation, additional dignities, natural
relationships, temporary relationships, Upagrahas,
effects thereof, calculation of Gulika etc., Gulika'e
exactp osition, Pranapadae, tc.

4. ZODIACAL SIGNSD ESCRIBED 48
Importance of Hora, Nameso f signs,Limbs of Kala-
purusha, classificationof signs, 12 signs described,
and Nisheka Lagna.

5. SPECIAL ASCENDANTS
Bhava Lagna, Ghatika Lagna, Hora Lagna, Use of
special ascendants, Varnada Dasa and effects of
Varnada.

6. THE SIXTEEN DIYISIONSO F A SIGN 67
Nameso f the 16 vargas, Ragi and Hora, Decanate,
Chaturthamsa, Sapthamsa, Navamsa, Dasamsa,
Dvadasamsa,Shodasamsa,V imsamsa, Siddhamsa,
Bhamsa, Trimsamsa, Chltvarimsamsa, Akshave'
damsa,S hashtiamsaV, arga classification,e to.



4

7- DIYISrcNAL CONSID ERATION 9 l
Use of tbe t6 divisions,H ora, Decanatea nti Trimsa-
msa efrects,Vimsopakas trength, Vimsopka propor-
tional evaluation, other sourceso f strength, Dasa
effccts with Vimsopaka strength,n ameso f bhav.as,
indkations from houses,etc.

8, ASPECTSO F THE.S/Gil.S 105
Sign aspects,p hnctary aspects,a spectual diagram etc.

g. EYILS AT BIRTH 109
Short life combinations, evils to mother, evils to
fathet, and about parcnts'

IO. ANTIDOTES FORE VILS 118

11, IUDGEMENT OF HOASES 120
Indications ofhouscs form lst to l2th, prosperity or
rnnihilation of a house.

12. EFFECTS OF FIRST HOI]SE t26
Physical comforts, bodily beauty, other benefits,
coitedb irth, birth of twins, to be nurturedb y three
mothers, Moon equatedt o ascendant, decanatesa nd
bodily limbs and a$ectationt o limbs.

13. EFFECTS OF THE 2nd HOUSE t32
Combinations for wealth, and for poveriy, loss of
wealth through the king, expenseso n good accoutrts,
fame, cffortlessa cquisition' eyes't ruthlessness.

14. EFFECTSO F TttE 3rd IIOUSE t37
Femalea nd rnale cobom, number of brothersand
ristcrs, advorec,Planets.

15. EFFECTS OF THE 4th TIOUSE r42
Houeing gomfortt, misccllaaeous, rqlatives, long-

. living mother, happinesst o mother,l quadrupeds,
dumbnerc, conveyangcs



, 5

16. EFFECTSO F THE ,Ih HOUSE 145
Happiness through children, no offspring, dcath of

. firsi child, difficult Brogeny' adopted issues, 3
mothers and 2 fathers, many children, obaining
daughters,q uestionable birth, mean children' child
at the ageo r 30,36, 40,32,33and5 6 andn umbero f
ohilcircn.

17. EFFECTS OF THE 6th HOUSE t52
Ulccr/bruises, relatives affectod, facial diseasel'
tcprosy,d iseasesin  general,t iming of illness,u nfortu-
nut" yott, loss thtough enemies, inimical sonr and
fear from dogs.

l8: EfiFECTS OF THE 7th HOaSE ' 160

Sick wife, excessivel ibidinousners, death of wife,
many wives, mlsceltaneousm attersrw orthy spouse'
evlls to spouse, loss of spouse' lack of conjugal

. ' felicity, time of marriage, timing of wifc's death'
throe marriagesa nd shortilvedw lfe.

Ig. EFFECTSO F THE 8thI IO(ISE 169

Long life, short life, Saturn and l0th lord in longe-
vitY.

20. EFFECTSO F THE gtlt HOUSE 173

Combinationsf or fortunes, fortunate father, indigent
father, long livlng father, wealthy and famonsf ather,
virtuous and devotedt o father, fortuncs, inimical to
fathcr, bcggedf ood, combinationsf or father's death'
fortunatp periods, lack of fortunes.

21. EFFECTSO F THE IOth HOUSE 178

Paternal happiness, performing religious ncrificcs,
royal patronage, carnal pleasures'o rnaments' ccssa'
tion of duties, learned,w ealthy, lack of virtuousa ct!'
obstruciionst o activities,c ombinatioasf or fame.



6

22. EFFECTSOF THE TTthN OASE 183
Many gains, incomei n Nishkas,no gainc, wcelth
lhroughc oborn.

23, EFFECTSO F THE 12t h HOUSB r86
Expenseor n good& tount, beautifuhl ousesa ndbcd,

, begcttinga  lpouse, planetsin  visiblc snd iavisiblo
halvesg, oingt o hcll, final omancipalionw, andcring
in the country, earningt hrough sinful mcagurcs,
crpeaditureo n religiousg rounds.

24. EFfF TS OF THE BEAYA LORDS 189
Effcetco fthe 12 bhavaio rdsi n various houses(t otal
144comblnationsc),l uest o sortout mutuallyc{ntra.
dictory cfrects.

25, EFFECTSO F NON-LUMINOASP I,ANETS 236
Dhuma in lnrioue houses, Vyatipala la' various
houscs,Paridhii n varioush ousesC, hapai n varioup
housesD, hwajai n varioush ousesG, ulika ln various
house,P ranapada'sp ooitlona.le $ectsw ith
rcfercncct o natal agcendant.

26, EVALTJATIONO F PLANETARYA SPECTS 251
Plrnetarya spoctsa,s pectlncl valuationtS, peciarlu los

.for aspectos f Seturn,Marsand Jupltor.

21. aI'ALVATION OF rTRENGIFHS 269
Sthaana bala, SapthavargajabaOlaj,h ayugmarasi-
lmsabola,K endradrbah,D rekkanab ala, Digbalr,
Kaalabah,P akshab' Nalaai,sTarirbghikaag abah,V arsba-Masa-
Dina-Ilora bqla, hh, Ayena bata,

. Motional strenglh of Sun and Mooa, Drlgbale,
planetaryw at, motional strength foi Man etc.,
BhavabatasS, [adbala rcquirementsp, hpvae ffccts,
fiigiUitity to isue predictions.

28, ISHTA AND KASHTAB ALAS
. Exaltatioar ays,C hesbtaR asmi,b encffciael ud nalefis



7

fays, benefic and malefic tcndencies, naturc of cfiects
due'to digbala etc., Saptavargajab ala and ishta
kashta,e ftcts of a bhava.

.292
29.B HAVAPADAS 

Method of Pada calculations, special exceptions'
- Padas for planets, Pada and finance, Pada and

financiall ossesC, ainful sources7, th housef rom Pada'

. General.

30. UPA PADA 303

Upapada calculatlon, effecto f 2nd from Upa pada,
o,if.-fto. the 2nd of Upapada,a bout sons,o btain-
ment of many sonsa nd many daughters,c oborn from
Lagna Pada, other m&ttersf rom Lagna pada'

31. ARGALA OR PLANETARY INTERYENTION 3II

rormation of Argala, Argala effects'

32. PL ANETAR Y KARAKATW'+g 316
Atmakaraka defined, importance of Atmakaraka,
other Karakas, Yogakarakaso r mutual coworkers,
houses ignific{lnce.

33. EFFECTS OF KARAKAMSA 327
Karakamsa in various signs, effects of planets in

'Gulika 
Karakamsa, Rahu-Sun in Karakamsa, in
Karakamsa,e ffectso f aspectso n Ketu in Karakamsa'
effects of 2nd from Kaiakamsa, 3rd from'Kara'
kamta, 4th from Karakamsa, 5th from Karakamsa'
6tt fro- Karakamsa,? th from Karakamsa,S th from
Karakamsa, 9th from Karakamsa, l0th from Kara-
kamsa, l lth from Karakamsa,l 2th from Karakamsa'
planetsi n 5th from Karakamsa'

34. YOGAK ARAKAS iro
Nature due to lordshipso f planets,natural benetior
and malefics, angulara nd trinal lordships, angular
lordship, Rahu and Ketu, Planets&  Aties ascendant,



Taurus ascendant, Gemini ascendant,C.ancera sc€n-
dant, Leo ascendantV, irgo ascendantL, ibra ascen-
daot, Scorpio ascendant, Sagittarius ascendant,
Capricorn ascendant,A quarius ascendant,a nd Pisces
ascendantG, eneral,

35. NABHASA YOGAS 3s7
Formationa nd effectso f Rajju, Musala,N ala, Maala
Sarpa, Gada, Sakata, Vihaga, Sringataka,H ala,
Vajra, Yava, Kamala, Vapi, Yupa, Sara, Sakthi,
Danda, Nauka, Koota, Chatra, Chapa, Chakra,

. Samudra, Gola" Yuga, Soola, Kedara, Pasa, Dama
.nd Veena Yogas.

36, MANY OTHER YOGAS 366
Subha,A subha,G ajakesari,Amala, Parvatha,K ahala,
Chamara, Sankha, Bheri, Mridanga, Srinatha,
Sarada, Matsya, Koorma, Khadga, Lakshmi,
Kusuma, Kalanidhi, Kalpadruma,T rimurthi, and
Iagnadhi Yogas.

37. LANARYOGAS 384
Adhiyoga from the Moon, Dhana yoga, Sunapha,
Ar.apba, Duradhura and Kemadrumay ogas.

'8. SOLARYOGAS 386
Veii, Vosi and Ubhayachari Yogas, effectso f these
Yogae.

39. RATAYOGAS 387
Kingly Yogasf orming in variousm ann'ers.

&. YOGASFOR ROYAL ASSOCIATION 399

41. YAGAS FOR WEALTH 402
Yogas for affluence, effects of angutar lord'sdivi-
sional dignitics, effectso f 5th lord's divisional digni-
ties, efrcctso f 9th lord's divisional dignities, angular



I

and trinal lords relatod,effectso f divisional dignities
of the two planetsr elated.

42. COMBINATIONS FORP ENURY 413

43. LONGEVITY 416
Pindayu, rectifications,d cductionsf or planetsin  the
visibleh alf, maleficsin  ascendanta, scendant'cso ntri-
bution, Naisargayu,A msayu, longevity for other
living beings,f ull life spanof variousl iving beings,
choiceo f longevity, doubtful casesclarified,o ther
cluest o longevity,f urther clarificationsr,e ctificatiohs,
specialr ulesf or Seturna nd Jupiter, increasea nd fall
in classo f longevity,I imltlessl ongevity,s upernatural
longevity, living till the end of yuga, living the life :
spano f a sage.

44. MARAKA ( KILLER) PLANETS 440
Marakasbasedo n lordship, maraka dasa,s tar groups
relatedt o death, Rrhu-Ketu as Marakas,3 rd house
and death, occupantso f the 8th house,f ate of the
corpse,serpentd ecanatesp, renatala bode,ascenat fter
death,

45. AVASTHAS OF PLANETS 448
Infant state etc,, Awakening,d reamingand sleeping
states, Deepta and other 8 ptates,L ajjitadi avasthas,
calculation of Sayanaand other I I Avasthas,e ffects
of Cheshta ete. effects of Sayanadi Avasthas for
planetsf rom the Sun to Ketu.

ERRATA 483



Preface

Presentedh erewithw ith pleasurei s the first-everE nglish
translationo f the full text of the availablev ersiono f Maharshi
parasara'sB rihat ParasaraH ora.sastra. But for the blessings
of Lor<iG anesath is would haveb eena s uphill task forme'

Sri Maha Vishnu is the god f gods.So is ParasaraHora-
the book of books in the field of astrology.

The work is in the form of a carritch betweens ageP araqara
and his disciple Maitreya who later himself becamea  worthy
sage.P arasarab elongingt o Vasishta'sli neagew as Veda Vyara's
faitrer. As coulclb e seelri n the courseo f progressingth -orugh
li. t.*,, sage Saunakaw as the preccptoro f Parasarai n the

lnatter of aitrotogy. Saunakaw as one of the earliests agesa nd

wasG arga'sd isciPle.
Thi dateo f parasarac ould be attributedt o be roughlyt he

efa of Dharma Raja of Maha Bharata' This can be understood

when the sages tates" in the presentY uga, Dharma Raja is born

with the combination of..." He further statest hat Salivahana
;*itr u, born with the samec ombination...'F urther,t he reader

could find statementsre latingt o the horoscopicy ogaso f Maha

Vitttou, Prajapati, Swayambhu Manu etc' which statement

could possiblyb e madeb y no ordinarym- ortal'
Varaha-M ihira in Brihat Samhita, Kalyana Varma tn

Saravalia nd many such other illustrious authors gaver eferences
df ?arasara'sa strologicals tatements'

ParasaraH ora finds its translation ih Bengali,M alayalam
etc. which translationsh oweverh ave not beens oenb y me' I
havew ith me the following versions'

1. Sri VenkateswatPa ressB, ombay,p artly renderedin  Hindi'
For a msjority of slokas,o ne can find Sanskritc ommen'
tary only.



r l

2. Hindi translation by Suaram Jha. (Master Khelari Lal,
Varanasie dition)

3. Hindi transtation by Devachandra Jha (Chaukambha
edi.tion)

4. Hindi transhfion by GanesaD atta Pathak( Thakur prasad
edition)

Afterrcrutinizing critically the .four manuscripts,I .have
for ieasona of more credibility chosen the Sanskritv ersion
renderedb y SitararmJha. Thc Chaukambhav ersioni s almost
the sameas that of Khelari Lal's.

Othcr versionst hat I havec omea crossa re :
l. Tamil translation by C. G. Rajan-for only 36 cbapters,

without SanskritI 'erses.

2. English translationb y N. N..K. Rao for only 25 chapters,
witbout Sanskrits lokas.

Thus, I have felt a neid to make the original version
avallablei n Englisht o the fullest possiblee xtent. Our version
has97 cbapterscontaining English translationa nd exhaustive
alnotations and exanrples.

To handlet he publicatione asily,w e haved ividedt he work
in two volumes.T he presenvt olume-first volume-contains4 5
cbapterswhile the remaining5 2 chaptersh ave beenp ut in the
secondv olume.

Chapter I and chapter 2 give some.  preliminary extra-
astrological information. From chapter 3, tho astiological
information begins. , In tbis chapter, phnetary descriptions,
benefics aod malefics, planetary deities, complexions, s"*,
primordial compoundss, easonsr,e lationshipsd, ignitiese tc. uri
given. Methodso f calcuratingt he'5 upagrahas rike Dhooma
and Muburta velas like Gulika are given. Thesea re totally ten
and have thcir own say on a nativity, as the other nine Lain
Grabas have. so to say, these upagrahasa nd Muhurta vela5
can alter in suitebh proportions the effectsd uc to Nava crauai



l 2

In tho matter of calculation of Gullka, a different concept comes
to light from this oldestwork. The latcr authorshaveg ivena n
altogether variable in knowing Gulika's position whereas
Perasara advised that it should be cast for the beginnin! of
Saturn's Muhurta. Whoreas somes uggestt hat it should be for
the endingM uhurta of Saturn.

In chapter4 , each Rasi is describedf rom variousangles.
Slokas 25-30 are the climax of this chapter. An unerring
method to find out the Nisheka Lagna (or the moment of
intercoursec ausingc onception)f rom the time ofl birth is outlined.
Though the prooess of calculation is as simple as a school
student's mathematical quiz, it hasg reat truth in it which even
modern science could not discover. To provo the truth of the
statementi n the sago'si nstruction, a practicai examplehas been
given by me. An assumed exanrple cannot better solve the
probfem. A practical case where the time of coitus is astrologi-
call;r choseni s taken in hand; time of birth has alsobeeng ot
accuratelynotod. From the tinroo f birth, the time of Nisheka
(or of coitus)i s traced which is not in variation, event o the
slightest extont,with the originallynotedN ishekat ime. Again
from the time of Nisheka,t he birth time is tracedi n a forward
manner using only traditional rules of astrology. This exercise
provest hreei mportant points, viz.

l. The point of M.C. is to bc found out in the mtal horos-
cope aod housesi ntersecteda ccordingly. This is popularly
called Sripati Paddhati. Originally Parasaraq dvocatedt his
system.

2. Gulika's position should be found out for the bcginningof
Saturn'gM uhurta only.

3. Lahiri's Ayanamsai s the first best. The reader will find
that we have used Moon's exsct longitude in the abovc
prqcess. Simple angular distanceby any Ayanamsaw ill
not elter the solution, but a slight change in Moon's

. poeition will take us fer away from the truth. With lahiri's
.Ayanamsa, we can safely work out even Nadiamsas,w hich
ohangef ast,



l 3

The method givenb y me in working out the future birth
time from the time of coition can very well help the astrologers
to foretell the exact momentof birth from the time of query.
Reseacherse vealt hat time of query hasa  perfecta lignmentw ith
the time of Nisheka.

Chapter5 toucht-isv arious special lagnas, tike Ghatika
Lagna, Hora Lagna and BhavaLagna. The importanceo f these
ascendanscsa nnot be . underestimated. A final Bhava chart can
emergea fter merging the different bhava charts causedby these
various special ascendants. This final bhava chart can only
revealt he extent of planetarye ffects when consideredh ousew.se
whereast he bhava chart exclusivelyp reparedo n natal ascendant
alone can sometimes mislead. This is what the sageemphasises
ln sloka 9.

Cqme to chapter6 . The zodiaci s dividedi n to sixteen
Vargaso r divisions. Thesea re called ShodasaV argas. How to
find out such Vargasa nd thcir use are fully explained. These
are from Rasi down to Shashtiamsa. In the classification,t he
vargasa re made in four groups' i.e. 6 vargas,T Vargas,1 0 Vargas
and 16 Vargas and special technical names haveb eon given for
the total number of desirablev argasa  planet attainedf or easy
identification. For example if a planet is said to be in Golo'
kamsa,i t indicatest hat out of 16 Vargas,i t is in l5 good V:rrgas.
Theset echnicaln amesappeari n the gradationof Raja Yogas.

Each Varga findsa certain specificu sei n preferencot o a
planet's Rasi position. For example,w ithout consideringt he
Dvadasamscah art no tangibler esuitsd ue to the native'sp arents
can be known. In decidingone'scareer,t he Dasamsap ositions
of the planetsa re of supremeimportance. Thesea re highlighted
in chapter7 . In this very chapter the sage enunciatews hat is
called Vimsopaka strengthof a planet. He assignsa  maximum

. of 20 pointst aking againd ifferentlyt he four Vargaclassifications,
. viz. Shadvarga, SaptaVarga, Dasa Varga and ShodasaV arga.

The considerationh ere is whether a planet is placedi n own sign,
, friendly sign, encmy'ss ign and the like in the concerncdV arga

scheme. Ihen an eveluatonis  done to get Vimsopakas trength.
This strength enablesus decidet he extent of auspiciouseffectsa 
planetw ill be capableof revealingi n'a dasa.



l 4

Chapter8  dealsw ith what is calledJaimini aspectso n Rasi
basis. Maharshi Jaimini was the sage who expanded these
Parasari principles very extonsively in Sutra form for easy
nemorization and successfual pplicability. The original concept
is howeverf rom the pen of Parasara.

Childhoodevilsa re discusseidn  chapter9  whiie chapter1 0
prescribesp lanetaryc ombinationst o combat zuch possiblee vils.

Basic information about the 12 housesc ould be f<rundin 
chapter I I while specifica ttentionmay be given to slokas 14-16.
Thesc 3 slokasservean important key in knowing how a Bhava
is going to give effectsunder various circumstances.

Chapters12-23g ivea  varietyo f information and instruc-
tions in analysingthe 12 houseso f a horoscopei n a systematic
manner. A closo study of theser ules will tame one'sm ind to
scientiflcallya pproach the horoscopef or fruitful resuts.

Chapter'24i s again one of the most important chapters.
Here, the various effectsof a Bhava lord being in a specifichouse
are given. All tho 12 lords are fully covered. How to Eorto ut
a situation in case of contrary indicationsi s given in slokas
145-148.

The bhavaeffectso f Dhooma,V yatipata,G ulika ctc.. are
narratedf ully in chapter2.5. PranapadaL agna's positionv is-a-
vis natal ascendanatl so revealsc ertain speciale ffectsa s could be
seeni n this very chapter.

ShadbalacalculationsI,s htaand Kashtap halasa nd other
related mathematicala spectsa re elaboratelylaid down in the 3
chaptersv, iz. 26,27 and 28.

It is not in order if planetsa rp studiedw ith referenceto 
meren atalchart. Padasf or varioushousesw ill furfher alter the
planetary sffects.T his is what is taugbti n chapter 29. Raja
Yogas, inter alia are best analysedt hrough Arudha chart or Pada
chart. The sage suggestsG rahaP adasa s well, but u0fortuna-
tely he leavesit  at that without addingm uch information.'

For still deeper researchU, papadawill be more effective.
This areaw ill give moie cluesp articularly about marriage,f inanco
and.diseases.Seechapter3 0.

Chapter3 l entitled'Argaladhyayat'hough brief hasw orthy
information on planetary interventions, obstructionsand effects
thereo).



t5

Significancoef  planetsis  treatedi n chapter32.
Karakamsa is the Navamsa Rasi occupiedby Atma

Karaka. Plenetsf orming a certainr elationshipwith Karakamsa
and their effects are narrated in chapter33 extending to 99
slokas.

Chapter 34 is againo ne of the most instructive. Planets
.assumea  certaint endencyb y virtue of owninga  certainh ouse.
The sagee laborately touchess uch roles for various planetsf or
all the 12 ascendants. He decideso n such principlest he Yoga
Karakas,V oga Bhanga,K arakasa nd Marakas for eachascendant'
This will enable us undentand whelher planet will give bene'
ficial resuttso r adverseeffects.D eath dealing planetso r Mrakas
allow us to guesst he period of one'sd eath,

' 
.d,st he name implies, chapter3 5 lists NabhasaY ogas which

are availablel n most stlndard texts. Many new Raja Yogas
could be found in chapter 36, like Khadga, Mridanga, Chamara,
Kahala etc.

Chapters! 7 and3 8 deal with Lunar and Solar yogasw hich
are popularly known. Raja yogas in chapter 39' Yogas for
royai associationin  chapter4 0, and financial combinationsin 
chapter 41 desorvel pecial nention, containing a vapiety of
authoritativei nformatidn

Maraka or deathd ealingp lanetsh avea say on the finances
of the native apart from causing his end' Theseare tersely
entightenedin  the 42nd chaPter.

The chapter on longevity,b earing No' 43, is amongt he
rnost important onss. Pindaytr, Naisargayu,A msayu and the
like, and computations besed on ascendant/planetarpya irs
linking with movable, fixcd and commons igns containi nstruc-
tive information. If, thp notes,I  havet akenP indayuc alculations
and worked out a fullfledged example touching all aspectsof
co$putation. I havea dopteda  scientificm ethodf or deductions
for planetaryc ontributions arising by placement in bhaias 12
to 7. I havb simply not considered bhava positions
in these deductionsb ut degree-wisep ositions of the various
planeti. I have given onecommon formula covering the six
bhavasand the readerc an work out the exact losso f longevity.
This can be usefully extened to any loss of years as far as



1 6

bhavas1 2t o 7 is concernedin othcr systemla s well. Other
tongevityc alculationsh avebeen suitablya nnotatedb y me.

The readerw ill also do well to studyc hapter4 4 concerning
Marakas beforeh e takesa  decisiono n longevity. Rahu/Ketu
havealsob eena ssignedM arakatwar oles.

The concludingc haptero f Vol I is the 45th dealingwith a
number of kinds of Avasthaso f the planets' Out of these,t be
12 Avasthask, nown as SayanadAi vasthasa re of supremeimpor-
tance. If one tries to interpret theseA vasthasin proper spirit,
he will be ablet o detect the diseasetsh e nativew ill suffer. I
have supported niy views with the help of information from
Adbhuta Sug"ru of Ballala Senaa nd Hora Ratna of Balabhadra.
For example,i f Mars is in Agamanavasthao, ne will suffer fronr
deepe ar pains, . In the normal parlance,w e considero nly Jupiter
in ine context of ear defects. Diseaseso f hand and foot are
assignedto  venus in Agamanavastha. If one conductsa  scien'
tific researchin  the matter of diseasesw ith the help of planetary
Avasthas,v iz. Sayanadi Avasthas,o ne is bound to reachm any
brilliant clues.

The presentw ork offersa  vact scopef or suc@ssin  predic'
tive astrology. One can build up his own applied astrology
insteado f theoreticaal strologyi f he works on the linessuggested
by MaharshiP arasara.

A word of cautioni s nccessarfyo r the benefito fthe reader,
In order to understandt he hidden aspectso f the variousr ules
given herein, what is required is a thorough understandingo f
thesep rinciples. Skipping over fast to an ensuingc haptermay
not convey the real ideao f a 'present' chapter. To make the
reader's Job easier,I  have explained every difficult aspect as
clearly as I understandb asedo n my own experiencea nd study of
other authoritative texts'

In the end, I would like to mention that my attempt to
translateth is greatw ork anda nnotatem ay not haveb eenw holly
successful. I surely would have left some shortcomingsu nno-
ticed and unrectified. From the readers,I  can onlT expectt he
afrectiono f forgiving me for any innocent lapses.

New Dplhi R. Santhanam
VijayaD asami 1984



t ' r s : :

@
r{}qqrrrq nq:

dIET
BRIHAT PARASAR^A,

HORA SASTRA
[ffiiiri qawrrfrfrf<ti @t
<argdn ltfrtnmroi rqrfq fhfrvr<qr+irnnr r

I p]ostrateb efore the lotus-feet of Lord Vighneswara,
the offspring of Uma, the cause of destructiono f sonow,
who is servedb y Bhuta ganas (the five great elementscf the
universe)e tc; who hast he face of a tusker and who consumes
the essenceo l Kapiththa and.J ambuf ruits'l

qftefiqfiqqlg1tpl: tltlt
q

Chapter I

The Creation
Brts{r gfiaiwi f"tlflif .rffiq{ |
qwql+fl *iq: rfqqeq gnrwfv: ttltt
rnrcr1!  qt{ goti Ta' *erggwq t
ferwd -"frfrrf-  Et<rq fqti iftilfa q uRll
qfoqfq faq dsar ERfa gi gl ! r
i{frRi a'tgfrqrfr 5tnn qq t qq} ! ttltt

'nri 
qfHtri stTifl wtnq FFI: 6q{?l

. qr{nfi qfercni q wEFrci < firc<tq ?t tvtt
1-4. Offering his dbeisancet o all-knowing sage Prnsrra

and with foldedhands,Maitreyr said, "O Venerable,.Astrology,
the supremel imb of the Yedas, has three divisions,v iz. Hora,



18 Brihat porasara Hora Sastra
Ganita and Samhita. Among the said three divisions, Hora or
genethliac part of astrology is still more excellent. I desiret o
know of its glorious.a spectsf rom you. Be pleasedt o tell me,
"How this Universe is created? How does it end ? What is the
relationship of the animals born on this earth with the
heavenlyb odies? Pleases peake labcrately".

Notes : Maitreya was Parasara'sa rdent disciple. Sdge
..Parasaraw as the illustrious father of BhagawanV eda Vyasa.
Partsra Smriti, Pergssn Sambita and the presentw ork para-
sert Horl are some of the immortal contributions made by
our sage.

Parasara'sp receftor wass age Saunaka,t he reputeda uthor
of Rigveda Pratisakhya and other vedic compositions, from
whom hc took instructions in astrology. Saunakaw ast aught by
Narada, son of Lord Brahma Pitamaha in the matter of astro-
logy and othcts. Narada got direct instructionsf rom pitamaha.
These details are stated by sage Parasarai n. the concluding
coapter ofthe presentw ork.

. The sagep redick In the courseof his treatise thet Saliva-
.hrna willbe born in t yogs csusod by relationship betweena n
uigular lord and a trinat lor as both are in Simhasgntmstrvide
ch. 41 slola 32. While the tecbnicrlities of the ashological
part of this strtement will be understood by the reader as he
progress€s with the study of tbis work, it witl be evidentt hat
Parasarr wasmuch before Sdivahana. The era of'salivahana
commencedln  ltD 72. Since Veda Vyrse is reveientidly referred
ts Parasaratmdja,m eaningt he ofrsprlng of Parasara,S agep uas-
en lived during Mrha Bhanta ero.

Sage Maitreya's name apDearsin  Veda Vyasa's Srimad
BhagavataP urana. Maitreya was sag€Kusaru's offspring. Sage
Maitreya achieveda  great deal of fnowledge in spirltuat an'A
orher topics. Vidura abandoned his kith and kin and met sage
Maitreya to achiever eligious merits.

As can be seen, our text is in the form of a carritch
betweens ageParasaraa nd Maitreya. the Master and the Disciple
respectively.

Astrolggy has three divisions, viz. Hora, Ganita and
Samhita. Hora dealsw ith genethliacp art while mathematical
aspectsl ike planetary movements, streqgths etc. aret aught by
the Ganita branch. Samhita meansa  collectioq or compen-



Chapter I . '
t9

dium of law, code and digesto f any branch of learning. These
are fike Rig VedaSamhita. Clnraka Samhita, Vasishta Samhita
etc. Thus ,Sarn&irais  not an original work.

m{ $a iETqI fqq ! qkrgqEfifrun r
srqr{ q'<tt ilg ffiqftt qndf g?r:u ltl
qf ?i?rr r6lfil q{gilfrrfiT{q{ |
qeqTfq *eqqd, qqr ilggaTrEq.ifr(i lqtl
{|ftmT glrT.ft|Fr wiEr sarqrRi r
eTrftaq,Tqi ilird'riir if: dtr Eranrnfet rurr
;r ari qfqlcqrq qrfwnrq {16rrrE rrI 

. {n qftfE{ g:d qTqt ;TT?i qu: rrcrr
5-8. Parasaraa nswered,. O Brahmin, your query (so to say,

the desiret o know of the infficacieso f astrology)n ai an auspici-
ous purposei n it for the welfare of the Universe. praying Lord
Brahma and Sri Saraswati, His power (and.consort)a, oA tne
Sun God, the leadero f the planetsa nd the causeo f Creation,
rshallproceed to narrate to you the scienceo fastrologyas
heardt hrough Lord Brahma. onry good will folrow the teaJhing
of this scienceto  the studentsw ho are peacefullyd isposed,w hi
honour the preceptors( and elders) who speako nly truit anO
who are God'fearing. woeful for dverd oubtlessrwy ill it be to
impart-knowledgeo ithis sciencet o an unwiiling student,t o a
heterodox and to a crafty person.

qSlsqmrirm) QsqriinlRfq:: rqthq{: r
{A{tq} qqi(ET{t tr*R"g"rfi*er:r err
dfltqr<m: ffiqfqf,r?qr snrrr.mrI 
qdrin qqiq{ 'qq?qqfd 

flild ul otl
fM ir€q +E€q q{d atqqfirf,: r
fqEF'r ilejrTToiTf  {rqur{ atwq utttl
aqtilral{iliqt,} feugaEir{g rffi r
4t"enin?rlfi) f*T, {rf{dfqsqtqd: 1t Rtl



n Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
,9-12. Sri Vishnu who is the lord (of all matters),w ho has

undefileds pirit, who is endowedw ith the thtee Gunas although
he transcends the grip of Gunas (i.e. Gunatita), who is tle
Author of this Universe, who is glorious, who is the Causea nd
who is endowed with valour has no beginning. He authored
the Universe and adninisters it with a quarter of his power.
The other three quarters of Him, filled with nectar,a re kno.
wable to (only) the philosophers (of maturity). The principal
Evolysl who is both perceptiblea nd imperceptiblei s Vasu Dwa.
The Imperceptiblep art of the Lord is endowedw ith dual powers
while the Perceptiblew ith triple powers.

qfffiqsfv?fn{m: wqilsr;rnftrm1 r
sFrftrril rftnfic-r$Rarv corJuni lt ltl
TkfiltrtTt qr rFlin aterTaqurq rdirc:fird1t 
@t ifrf,l qilufylt

i6,iqrq rqrf,srhsqfd'dc { rIflr qftqq r
dq:rlwrsFlRll fqG'g{l: ifiriuTTfqq:t rf ill

13-15.The three powersa re : Sri Sakti( Mother Lakshmi)
with Sattwa Guna,Bhoo Sakti (Mother Earth) with Rajoguna and
Neela,Sdtcrwi ith Tamoguna. Apart from the three, the fourth
Lind of Vishnu, influencedb y Sri Sakti and Bhoa Sakti,assumes
the form of Sankarshanaw ith Tatno Guna, of pradyumno with
Rajogwa and of Anirudha with Satwa Guna.

rqnil €fl n{iqrfi{'d: rR.F[. {il |
qq!1 dt{onqta, nqranrEtg;fr:l tqtl
irfiraarE €{ri wF rgrttrrqfaqq r
*g c*vtnma €{Rtqrsfrrfiqr qr: ul\etl

16-17. Mahattatwa, Ahamkera and Ahamkara Murthi,
Erahma,a re born from SamkarshanaP, radyumnaa nd Anirudha
r6pectively. All these three for-msare endowedw ith all the
tbree gunas,i vith predominanceo f the Gunad ue to their origin.

qiirRR"Et q?{r srRaafrnrara 
srftqlil qrersrriq ilqfr{+{dgfd: ulctl



Chaptert 2l
td l i r f f i r r l
ilqqr"€T{ ilfi cr0fd ssnffiq: uletl

18-19. Ahamkara is of tbree classes,L e. with S-;;a_t;wik,
Rajasik and Tanasik dispositions. Divine chss, scnsory 
and the five primordial compounds (ar, eartn J"jF
respectivelyf rom the said three Ahamkaros.

ufrrnnns Qd frrtr: R?Tq rfr wrerq r
X{rwf qq* lgr d}elrriqrf fisff, ft rrlorr

20. Lord Vishnu coupled wirh Sri Sakti rules over thC
three worlds. coupled with Bhu sakti, Heis Brahma causing
the universe. coupled wtth Neela sakti, He is siva, destroyini
the Universe.

w{g *q trcrTFtf ffir
a{ f( afeer ga ! fe{ii e qrqnqfrnlttl

, qig q{ *ig &qtiq'red nfqq r
dh't{il g&6wdt 't<rtnqirt6f:r c ulRtl
Hqfi{d rg: Ti wrrqalr|qq: r
qt qr* q rt{: r|TqrflfitTrfqt6.r:il Rltl
||RFTIE] atilqnfqsftr: fqqr{q: r
sqrTfrr1 qr.qrgr icr ffiqtl: nRvtl

2l-24. The Lord is in all beings and the entire Universe
is in Him. All beingsc onrain both Jeevatmau "a poiaii
lmsas, Someh ave predominenceo f the forner while yet some
have the latter in predominance. parqmatmctnsair  pt"do-ioaoi
inthe Grah^r viz. Sun etc. and Brahma, 6iva and others. Their
pouers or consortst oo have predominance gf paramatmonso.
Othershave more of feevatmamsa.



qqF[iTr(rf€TdtsttlrTI l:R l l
Chapter 2

Great Incarnations( Of The Lord)
1P15su16fr I t QI?tiII(l <qTq*t l
isfr *cindglar: hqr tQ gfr{q( lrr1rr

l. Maitreya : "0 sage,aret he inca.rnationosf  Vishnu,v z.
Sri Rama,S ri Krishna etc. endowedw ith Jeevamsa? 

<rrr: g;qlrl ql fqs I 1F(€,qr6(TiwIn 
qil gvthar<n-t qri dtqivtfltktt: llRll

2. Parasara : "O Brahmin, the four incarnations, viz.
Rama, Krishna, Narasimha and Varaha are wholly with
Paramalmamsa. The other incarnations (thao these,out of thc
ten) have in them Jeevamsatoo.

srreiqoqffi qtng tFtrtrrtt: | .
. dlqrqt t{qqi r${t qilta: ttltt

, tmrt .Tffrmtt tqrdi le1ut t
q{iefirttqtq q1lvilil: gln: rt,tttq llYlt

3-4.T he Unborn lord has manyi ncarnationsH.e  has
incarnatedis  the planets( JVavaG rahas)t o bestowo n the living
beingst he r-esultdsu et o their Karmas. He is Janardana.H e
assumedth e auspicioufso rm of Grahasto  destoy the demons
(cvil forces)a nd sustainth e divineb eings.

ilFlsftrr<: q{Tq q?rrq rgilFtt: I
fiEl qfrgltl !a: drgeu ir u{ll
qrril frgiawa qdd qdes q t
qm qlqFrq *fE*q€q {t61: llqlt

Rqtrwfrr<rq n qt;t ftsfq deql: t
qqftrrtnlsfutl} g t q{ dqqfqen:l lell



Chapter 2 23
. 5-7 From the Sun God the incarnation of Rama, from the

Moon that of Krishna. from Mars that of Narasimha, from
Mercury that of Budhdha, from Jupiter that of Vamana,f rom
Venus that of Parasu Rama, from Saturn that of Koorma
(Tortoise), from Rahu that of Varaha (pig) and from Fetu that
of Meena (Fish) occurred. All other incarantaions tlan these
also are through the Grahas. The beings with more paramatma-
msa arec alledd ivine beings.

cftqi{@Fr6} tS ffi ri qf,lfril: r
sqff€$,ql u{+am q<qftqiflfr:TFrr:i lqtl

TFTEIUT1q,q:q f gffir{r qqGil * r
aeq t fedtq;} gT: rrfr<q {m ilqtl
qffi:qactqi *$a) anil +1-gFuI: 
isfq iliq dH fuamA€ rrqGiQl rrqorr
st * qftnf fqs ! s{ qnqi qilefr r
Tdrqfr qfrcqftn ilwq1qFila fac:rr11rr
frqr asaq]ftrqil- dfri lr( rnnlfr nf(faq r
il€qrdalatetd ilrgui{rr fq{iqa: ltRtl
qt tr; vmrqnTi€T*Til. fr- <lq ffi r
fu am graT il?qfii qFqqiqHulitl

8-13. The beings with more Jeevatmamsar e (mortal)
beings. The high degreeo f paramatmamsaf rom tneC roior, iii.
Sun etc,d id incarnatea s Rama, Krishna erc. After compteting
thgmission, the Parantatmamsa(so f the respectiveO) *no', 

(in a[Ji
llerge the "respective)G rahas. The Jeevatmap ortions from
the Grahas take births as human beings and live their 
according lives

to their Karmas and again m.rge in the Grahas.
And at the timc of Great Destructioi, the Giahas *"1i..[.
in the Lord Vishnu. One who knows of all thes"e,, w ill becorie
versedi n the knowledgeo f the past,p resenat nd future. Without
a knowledgeo fastrology thesec annot be known. Hencee very.



24 Srihat Parasara Hora Sastra

onc should hovc a knowledge of Astrology particularly the
Brahmin. One who, devoid of astrological knowledge,b lames
this sciencew ill go to the hell called 'Raurava', and will be
reborn blind.

sM qilTuITESrTtsrtFltt I:  ll
Chrpter3 

Planetary Characters And
Description

cfqd rrlrfii tsw erqf,wi gi I I
tqt gqR{G{mi slTqr tfi,oTdi gil il trl

l. Maitreya : "O Sage,y ou havea ffectionately explained
about the planctary inoamgtions. Now kindly detail their chara-
cters and dispositions."

rIT FrF ! llrqflfq drqmt qRfcfil{ |
arriiln nfr ga-fr aqlthftErqiwr:r rRrr
tT iamirtR AinTfr nrffiE I
rnfr ffilnrnf{ ftq<rqrnfr qrf{ il rrtrr

2-3. Perasara: "O Brahmin, listen to the accounto f place-
ment of thc heavenly bodies. Out of the many luminousbodies
righted in the skies, some& re stars; yet some are planets( i.C.
Grahas). Those that have no movementsa re the Nakshatras( or
asterisms).

Notes :'Placed in the firmamentsa re many stsrsamong
which we have,f or astrologicalp urposes,2 ? starsa nd ? planets.
Rahu and Ketu though recogniseda s planetsf or astrological
delineationsa re shadowy. Theset wo are nodeso f tho Moons



Chapter3 25

and are exactlya part lS0degreesm utually. Their positionsa re
forrned when the Moon crossesth e ecliptic from northern latituCe
to southernone and vlce versa,

ilsq'a) qTfr TeGaq mt l g il ug: t
wfi51q ilrn€{{fi qfrq?qrR-srilElrrri:l vtt

t(alq{tRqTrrrql 'tqt&daqr: 
iFqr t

f,fear rlqTq: Rf€ q-{r€iqfitfEiflrrt: utrl

{T{it..trllirfrq d tanR< oFrarl I
qqfr{r-fqq}qrqis ci fq:ed{ qrt!q{ nr,tl

4-6. Those are callcd planets (or Grahas) that move
through the Nakshatras( or asterisms)in  the zodiac. The said
zodiac compriseso f 27 asterismscommencingf rom Aswini.
The sameareai s divided in 12 parts equalt o 12Rasis( or signs)
commencingf rom Aries. The names of the planetsc ommence
from the Sun. The sign rising is known as Lagna (or the
ascendant). Basedo n the ascendanta nd the planets joining
and departingf rom eachother, the native's good and bad effects
are deduced.

Notes : Planetsm ove in the zodiac through stellar nran-
sions pr Nakshatras. The nameso f the 27 Nakshatrasa re :

l. Aswini 2. Bharani . 3. Krittika
.4. Rohini 5. Mrigasira 6. Arudra
7. Punarvasu 8. Pushyami 9. Aslesha

10. Makha ll. PoorvaPhalguni 12. UthraPhalguni
13. Hastha 14. Chitta 15. Swati
16. Visakha 17. Anuradha 18. Jyeshta
19. Moola 20. Poorvashadha 21. Uttarashadha
22. Sravana 23. Dhanishta 24. Sathabhishak
f5. Poorvablr6dra 26. Uttarabhadra 27. Revati

Thenames of the planets a.regiven in sloka l0 of this
chapter.

The ascendantis  a very importat point in the horoscope.
It is the sigh that rises in the east, on the latitude of birth. The
apparentrising of a sign is due to the rotation of the earth on its
own axis at a rate of motion causinge very degreeo f the zodiao



26 grthat parasara Eora Sastra
reems to ascendo n the easternh orizon. Approximately, 
hoursa re required two

for_a signt o passv ra the'h"r;;;;;h.r"by
every degree taking four minutei to ascend, fni, 
however, Auratl"J,

i s actuallyd ependenot n the concernedla titude.
Actually the Sun has no motioF. His 

as is 
viewed an apparent 

f rom the rotating one
earth. ottrer-ptanet, 

nodesh ave iiJr"aligin"
varied rateso fjmotion. The av'erage

of the planets, d aily motions
w hich are not, however standard,a re as follows :

The Sun :  l o
The Moon :  l 3 - I 5 '
Mars
Mercury ' ::  30-45'

65-, l00'
Venus z 62-82'
Jnpiter :  5-15'
Saturn z 2 '
Node : 3 ' ,
With suchd ifferentm otions,

gith a  planetf orms 
others. rarious

Thesea spects a spects
t hrough-rongituoina

a greatd eal dri stance
o f utility in hs ave

astrology. ThisT , *nat 
8tst o if,e-;;;G;

be considered.

i* rTqrrrE"ani i'qt, ?tT{f;,,ottpftf;1
qrftqRT{gqTtqr 1tfqr-desFi ll rrurr

7. Detairs (of astronomicanr ature)o f starsb e understood
by ;eneral rules while I narrate to you about 
planets the ef

a 
fects

nd signs. o f

. Notes-: planetary movementsc an be fully understood 
astronomical from

ljterature ahd Samhitas. Naraia S";i;;":i;;;;
Samhita, Vasishta Samhita etc, are hinteJ at by parasu ri,fi
"general rules" or gtqlal SffGf. This may well mean
ordinary o ther

literatured evotedt o stefiarm ovemenrs.

eRq mr* qa: <in qrfiil llcFrimq r
tfl g€rT $eTf:i Tqf:f Emnl q Ftd f*ar rrcrt
r*alvt\rr*: Rrarierrdq qqE{:( Sat r
sTernlq fiq derri ilfiliqg"rd€i,,.,,



Chaptert 21

8-9. The positions of the planetsf or a given time be taken
as per Drikganiia. And with the help of Rasi durations appli-
LUt. to thJ respectivep laces,t he ascendant at birth should '

-be 
known. Now i tell you about the castes' descriptions and
dispositionso f the Planets.

qq dat rfq{qra} qHFilrir tuerqrl I
ga: qfi: {|{t qr6: tgr*t T{rnq ll { ot l

lO. NAMES OF PLANEZS .' The names of the nine
planets respectively are : the Sun, the .Moon, Mars, Mercury,
Jupiter, Venus, Saturn, Rahu and Ketu.

Notes : In the Sanskrit literatuie on astrology,t he planets
are denotedb y different names. Please see. ch. 2 of my English
translation of Horasara, for additional information in this
regard.

ffi1qi-Ttf{-qgar eft'i€-rrg-*.ffi:t 
ETt:,i rrqtl drql:, T(: T(-{tr tu: ltl lll

ll. BENEFICS AMD MALEFICS.' Among these,t he
Sun, Saturn, M'ars,-  decreasingM oot{, Rahu and Ketu (the
aseendinga nd the desceudingn odes of the Moon) are malefics
while the rest are benefics.M ercury, however,i s a malefrci f he
joins a malefic.

Notes : That decreasingM oon and increasingM oon are
.respectivelya  malefic and a benefici s the view conveyedb y the
sage.Y ct some exponentsa nd comrnentatorsh old the following
view :

When the Moon is aheado f the Sun but within 120",
she has medium strength. Between l20o to 240' she is very
auspicious, ssg qfffiIrlnii]. From 240" to 0" she is bereft of

, strength. This is Yavanas' view, vide P. 70 of my English
Trunslationo f Saravali. This view is, however, relatedt o the'
Moon's strength or otherwise, while waning Moon (Krishna
Paksha or dark half Moon) is a malefic and waxing Moon
(Sukla Pakshao r bright half Moon) is a benefic.

Should the Moon be conjunct a benefic or aspected tra
benefic,s het urns a benefic,e veni f in a waning state.



28 Brihat parasaraH ora Sastra
f _ As regardsM ercury, we have clear 

kr":"1-thathe instructions 
bec from

I omeas  maleficif hejoinsa 
Mo malefic.I f

\goint on and Mercurya r. tog.tn.i, iorr, ur" benefics:
refiil q Rqrqrv) rFr: gg{irFqir: I
€r{ $q} gri: x}m} tu} qifrqErq.F:trtRtl
iivql ilT{g<tift TU{rirErqr: r
tFqfq: $r{fli: r}wvqrarqgriTg :qE:u lntl

,l:l? ,_t!*!rA.Ry G7\ERNANCESrh.e.  suni st he
il:i"?,:j".3; :*Y,::lt :.:h'-'i;. ffi ; ;"" #eirtl:
hYa:p:p::in::e"s"sV..'e ^n_u:sg. o:un.:rqnsr1 .r-r.n_ (lpwortlrn'.ev)r_u-*pi,i,ierd;;;'"#;]J;:'":"1

r"g " rief. ,"r,lir.li.l
Notes : The degree of benefic effects 

mentioneda 
of the 

bovew 
indications

ill be commensurut*"i ttr 
corrcernedp lanet. tn. ,t..o!it;';il

If the Sun is strong,o ne 
soul wiff 

and have
will make a  mature

a 
d

bundants. pititual 
general ffiess  Knowledgea happinesws .

it nd
berpet acquiredir  rJpit". 

Grief i, 
wilt *.ilJ;;;;;:

not be there,i f Saturni s Uer.ft of strength.
<frffr} g rT.nnl +fif iiql tTtt?qET:t 
Eul rragnr-€q sfqqt gEqrid 

' illvtl
i.1tl_ <fegnra ilqr rwfggqrl r
gi nlq {,fEn!  qefftl sf#ena nt{rr

14-15.P LANETARY CABINET.. Of royal 
Sun statusarethe

and the Moon while Mars is the army chief. prince_
apparenti s Mercury. The ministeriapr ranets are Jupiter
Venus. Saturu a nd

i s a servant. Rahua nd Ketu form 
army. tfr. pfuo.tury

. triranql Rerdt{il q"ttqrr}f qrrft,{: r
irit"qrg:: $* Tr* fatvqrq)l lirRTttill  t qtl
rfrqrr* grit: {ft: {rrTTRrtq q l
Fuulql q*: grl ilrqt Eqrqq ! r r lurr

l. iil- . Leadero f elephantsa, nimalse tc.



Chapter3  29

1617. PLANETARY COMPLEXIONS .. The Sun is
blood-red. The Moon is tawny. Mars who is not very tall is
blood-iedw hiie Mercury's hue is akin to that of greeng rass.
Tawny, variegateda nd dark are Jupiter, Venus and Saturn in
their order.

q6qEEf{Tftlilrf aagf+s}u:q Tfqfr faq I r
qqHqi <Tqrri iil intr *tq q uletl

" 
18. PLANETARY DEITIES .. Fire (Agni), Water

(Varuna), Subrahmanya (Lord Siva's son following Ganesa).
Maha Vishnu, Indra, SachiDevi (the consort of Lord Indra)
and Brahma are the presiding deitieso f the 7 planetsi n their
order.

Notes : The-delties or Adhidovataso f the planetsa s given
above may be invoked to get the respective planets' africtions
cured. For example,e vils indicatedb y Mercury can be brought
under control by offering prayerst o Sri Vishnu Bhagawan.

The nameso f the planetary deitiesare additionally emp-'
loyed by Varaha Mihira in selectinga name for the child. The
consonantsa nd vowels are attributed to the seven planets as
under.
o'il,' sun The Vowels( 12 in numberf rom e{ to l11)

fc-z*It46ea SemiV owelsviz. zr,T , n[ andq 
Sibilantsv iz. W,t t and c
Aspiratev iz. 6

.Mars Guttural viz. :F',€ , rI, Et and I
$...i-Venus Palatalst iz 4, tt, sf, g and 6t

K&\iu^* MercurY Cerebralsv iz. e,6, g, d and oI
i*J-"' IuPiter Dentalsviz. e, aTE, , s and;f

lpudt,t.. Saturn Labials viz. q, $, if, $r and q

The name of the child can be selectedw ith an initial letter
as above basedon the strongerof the two, viz. natal ascendant
lord and Navamsa ascendantl ord. For example, if Mars is
stronger,t he name can havea guttural in the beginninga ppropri-
ate to the presiding deity. In this case, Subrahmanyai s the
deity .and the name can be Kumara (gqn) or Guha (gq).
Similar deductions can be suitably made in other cases. If the



30 Brilnt parasara Hora Sastra
initial letter belongst o a planetw ithout dignity, it will bring bad
lupk.

Likewise,t he Nakshatrasto o have presidingd eities. Any
ion caused to natal star by way of maleflc oceupation, or

o r l n a can off
the concerned. The 27 deitiesa re

Aswini Aswini Kumara
Bharani Yama
Krittika Agni
Rohini Brahma
Mrigasira Moon
Arudra Siva
Punarvasu Adiri
Pusbyami Jupiter
Aslesha Rahu
Makha Sun
PoorvaP halguni Aryama
Uttara Phalguni Sun
Hastha Viswa Karma
Chitta Vayu
Swati Indra
Visakha Mitra
Anuradha Indra
Jyeshta' . Niruti
Moola Varuna
Poorvashadha Viswadeva
Uttarashadha Brahma
Sravana Vishnu
Dhanishta Vasu (qg)
Sathabishak Varuna
Poorvabhadra Ajacharana
Uttarabhadra Ahirbudhanya
Revati Poosha

For example,i f Ketu
is in Krittika in the 9th house,t he evil effcctsd ue to fatherw ill
be given by Ketu iu Sun's dasa (related to Krittika). Hence
propitiation of Firu god will counter the possible evil.



Chapter3  3l

Alternatively, Lord Ganesa representing Ketu may also be
pleaseds uitably.

lalq"ta 1 qWil q tqa.t€Iqfau ! r
ir<r: iqrrq fqi{r wguTe} grwqntle.n

19. SEX OF THE PLANETS .' Mercury and Saturn are
neuters. The Moon and Venusare femalesw hile the Sun, Mars
and Jupiter are males.

: {rftr faq ! t
qlqrfr"t qrwi q ffi?ilfrfr qeftdq{ llQoll

20. PRIMORDIAL COMPOUNDS .. The PanchaB hootas,
viz. fire, earth. ether, water and air are respectivelyg overnedb y
Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venusand Saturn.

gqdl f-qr<qrTS wnl' arfanlG q i r
rtfrrgM n{qquruTf r: vrr} Gq]eq!  rrRlrr

21. PLANETARY CASTES .' Jupiter and Venus aro
Brahmins. The Sun is a royal planet while the Moon and
Mercury belong to commercial community. Saturn rules the
Sudras( 4th caste).

dfqs{raq: triti gq{T} qsmrqr r
qrige-u<tgel cw:-ryftrrl ' Gq ! ltRitl

' 
22. Satwik planetsa re the luminariesa nd Jupiter, Venus

and Mercury are Rajasik while Mars and Saturna re Tamasik
plancts.

Notes : The Satwa,R ajasa nd Tamasik natureso f planets
will have a say on the disposition of the native. For further
information, seemy notes,l rde P. 51 of Seravali.

qfafav I r
Wcrl dtq gqFrcq{q}fa q ! rrqlrr

. . 23. DESCRIPTION OF THE SUN .. The Sun's eyes are
honey-coloured. He has a square body. He is of clean habits,
bilious,i ntellilent and hasl imited hair (on his head).



32 Brihaf parasara Hora Sastra
Notes : Much additionald etailsc ould be gatheredf rom

my notesi n ch. 4 of saravaria nd ch. 2 of Horasrra. The native
will be influencedi n appearanced, ispositione tc. by the strongest
planeto r the ascendanltord or the Navamsaa scendanlto rd.

ir$zlRFfi',rn'g:r f,TqGl
lragfav ! r

!rT{s rTqffiq{q qsqql TfirgT: illvtl
24. DESCRIPTION OF THE MOON .. The Moon is

very windy and phlegmatic. Shei s learned and hasa  round
body. Shehasauspiciouslo oksa nd sweets peechi,s  ficklemind-
ed and very lustful,

Ttl rtterql qtq{qqq}Ercqflar:r 
fqasafdr: *dt U{IqeErirgftq!  ttR{tt

25. DESCRIPTION OF MARS .. Mars has blood-1g6
eyes,i s fickle-minded,l iberal, bilious,g iven to anger and. has
thin waist and thin physique.

?!:aiso: fqqGEqT{qqfaqrwnfkqu: r
fqrcr1 6sqr1 fqs ! qrwq6ldwcn uRqtl

. 26. DESCRIPNON OF MERCURY.' Mercury is
endowedw ith an attractive physique and the capacityt o use
words with many meanings. He is fond of jokes. He hasa 
mix of all the three humours.

1€(il* Ua$iq fqf'ql qdilat r
mqcSR{} alqn Finnefq{n€: nRstr

27, DESCRIPTI@N OF JUPITER : Jupiter has a big
body, tawny hair and tawny eyes,i s phlegmatic,i ntelligenta nd
learned in all sastras

gdt womg dea:g clatr vril: ga:r 
6rdqt,at ttn'rfhrdshtnin w[qdq: nQet l

28. DESCRIPTION OF VENUS .. Venus is charming,
h4s a splendorougphysique,i s excellent or great in tlisposition,
hascharminge yes,i s a poet, is phlegmatica nd windy and has
curly hair.



Chapter 3 33

Notes : The word gdt in the text hasmanyp urports like
happy, virtuous, charming etc. Since Venus is a charming
planet,t he said meaning' charming'h asbeen used. However,
I do not imply that Venus is not a virtuous planet etc.

gr{hirg: qr'tR: &gieufrqrcrnr: I
€qeiafr5qq; ,itr s<<lqrq] Gq ! rrRerr

29. DESCRIPTION OF SATURN .. Saturn has an emaci-
ated and long physique,h as tawny eyes,i s windy in tempera-
ment, has big teeth, is indolent and lame and basc oarsehair.

{qT{ri {t*qircu}sfr rlqfiT: I
qrdr5filsl dtnq r<$gwirr: fdt uQotl

' 30. DESCRIPTION OF RAHa AND KETU .. Rahu has
smoky appearancewith a blue-mix physique. He residesi n
forests and is horrible. He is windy in temperamenta nd is
intelligent. Ketu is akin to Rahu.

qRq ttil€{q'1 qsw itn EfqI {tri}qqr
nrgiwrdtuwa nrq qat<afla q!rrttrr

31. PRIMARY INGREDIENTS( OR SAPTA DHATUS) :
Bones,b lood, marrow, skin,f at, scmenand musclesa re respecti-
vely denotedby the planetsf rom the Sun etc.

Notes : The Sun and others upto Saturnr ule the Sapta
Dhatus or primary ingredientsof the body, as denoteda bove.
Tfueirstrengthor weaknessin dicates afety or otherwise to the
Dhatu concerned. 'For examplei,f  the Sun is affiicteda t birth,
the native is liable to suffer disorders of bones, breakageo f
bones,and the like. The nativewill incur disorderso f blood if
the Moon is primarily ill-disposed. Similarly other aspectso f
the Dhatus may be considered.

' teriuqi{ affigTEli't atq q I
nhnrrqlerrmFg ileil: qrrfEq:l wrrEn QRtr

32. PLANETARY ABODES .' Temple, watery placd,
placeo f fire, sport-ground, treasure-housbee, d-room and filthy
ground : theseare respectivelyt he abodesfor the seven planets
from the Sun onward.



U Brihat ParasaraH ora Sastra

Notes:  The abodesd enotedhave varied uses,p articularly
in horary astrology. If, for example, Mercury is related to the
r@overyof a lost article, it will be near a sport-ground. If it
is Venus,i t is in the bed-room,and so on and so forth,

Gq ! r
sqt€fqi nqlaiat f{k{i{i faqtflq !tt11rt

33. PLANETARY PERIODS .' Ayana, Muhurtha, a day
(consistingd ay and night), Ritu, month, fortnight and year :
Thcseart the periods allotted to the planets from the Sun to
Saturn,

Notes : The durations cited can be related to the maturity
of an event,p articularly in horary astrology and in Dasa bhukti
judgements. Should the Sun,f or example, be related to the
fruition of an event, it witl be in about six months.

Ayana is the time taken by the Sun to ccmplete one
course-northern or southern in tbe zodiac, This is about six
months. The Moon indicatesM uhurtha, which is equal to
48 minutes. Ritu is approximately two months or the time
rcquired for ths Sun's transit of two Rasis.

The period indicated by Rahu is 8 months and Ketu
3 months( vide sloka 46 of this ch.). Also sees loka 18,c h. 4 of
Saravaliw hich statesf urther useo f thesei ndications.

6e--Elr(-fifftT R- u<qTIrn {'ql qr6'I:
nlq d fHqr: qqt€tri r:qr@sftds Ytl

rl|
Y 34.APLANEVR*Yts rgs Pungent,s a'line,bitter,

mnlixeeod, ,s wfreEeet,t ,a cliduifoouussa nhda  asttnrninsgeel nta re' respectivelytastes
lorded by the Sun e/c.

Notes : The strongestp lanetw ill give the native a pen-
chant for the particulart aster uled by it. Alternatively,o ne may
like the tasteO enotea_ngteZ na to4 or the t coniunct he
2nd lord. The. too has a say in ihe. matter.
II many are related, the stroqgesot ne prevails.

giwl Efq-fi [{ qfq-qtqt q aftrt r
qfrqt qqg?riT fsa-qrrl aqlqi nR{rr



Ahapt", 3 35
frvtrqi afvava;a-gn-uta qqfif, fq r
q{ar a} qefti q} fei iqr laqtnq! rrlqrr
rcqi q qfc'{: Trr: qlrfl a'lrigq:f ci r
drqui q'hqdal qat qrqqlsqr: nlstl
etiner6Ekruri qd* qfe?rilqrr 
rFqlg{rqrcraT $rtr {triqmr:n Qetl

35-38. PLANETARY STRENGTHS .. Strong in the east
are Mercury and Jupiter. The sun and Mars are so in the south
while Saturni s the only planett hat derives strengthi n the west.
The Moon and Venusa re endowedw ith vigour when in the
north. Again, strong during night are tho Moon, Mars and
Saturuw hile Mercury is strongd uring day and night. fhe rest
(i.e. Jupiter, the Sun and Venus)are strong only in aay time.
During the dark balf maleficsa re strong. Benefics acquire
strength in the bright half of the month. Malefics and beneicg
are respectivelys trong in Dakshinayana and Uttarayana. The
Iords of the year, montb, day and Hora (planetaryh our) are
strongert han the other in ascendingo rder. Again stronger than
the other in the ascendinga re : Saturn, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter,
Venus,t he Moon and the Sun.

. Notes : Indicated in the first instance are directional
strengthso r digbaln. The following are the directionsr elated to
a horoscope.

East ascendaVnt  4
North 4th houseo r thc NaOir?  ?
Wpst 7th houseo r the descendanuR
South lOth houseo r the meridi an (9 6

Thesea re to be reckoned only from the ascendanta nd not
from the Moon.

Jupitera nd Mercury haveDigbalai n the ascendant. The
Suna nd Mars acquiret his strengthin the lOth houseS; aturnd oes
so in the 7th. The 4th givesd irectional strengtht o the Moon
and Venus. The planetg ets no Digbalai f it is.i n the opposite
sign with reference to its Digbala house. For example,Saturn
hasno Digbalai f he rises.
,  The.useo f  D igba lai s :@l l

dtj.rt thr n"tt
""ti"r 



36 Brihat ParasaraHora Sastra

@llgjorded by i!. If JupiterN  m the ascendantth, e periods
;?TilpffilTlTtr$ccess in north-eastt,he direction. ,rt"d by
it. The directionsof the planetsm aybe understooda s under: 

Tho Sun - east
Saturn - WOSI

Venus - south-east
The Moon '- north-west
Mars - south
Mercury - north
Jupiter - north-east
Rahu - south-west

one undertakes living in or jo

h"jr *ill b" obut*"ti. r.
Io uaderetand other strengths,t he reader is referred to

Smvell, Part In my English translation and notes thereof in
this context.

qfr wafr F(qr1 gqrrq qrigemI: 
qiftH'<nn rt;il: rrarrurt urrgr:u le.rl
g.q!ff lrft: l* ga-a} rt.6-dltrFItl 
t'lwq q,igerq qt iqr: arqrf aElrr tvotl

39-40. RELATED fO TREES .' The Sun rules strong
trccs (i.e. tree3with stout trunks). Saturn uselesstr ees,t he Moon
grilky trees( like rubber yielding plants),M ars bitter ones( like

lemon plants), Venus floral plants, Jupiter fruitful ones and
Mercury fruitless ones.

Note : Much information can be seeni n Brihat Jataha
and Saravali in rcgard to birth of trees.

lrflqrwrdqrfuq \ufcrrctaw t
mfaarffi qc*ri ?{trTgiqt llvlll
ker;qr quif'rcq ta}fiqagfr faq ! r
dfi <qlficrft: ffiql ffiq ! ttvqtt



Chdptert 
37

!ft, ilerrqt fqs t qrrl: eTlqa ,iqq r
rnqnld qTrr6,r€rrd : wtqfmf Eq!rrvlrr
IEr{ =tqa'i{ g RF{F; So'ar rr I
rei fTi nifqq ! qaad atE q uyvtl

4l-44. OTHER MATTERS .. Rahu rules 
while the 

Ketu governs outcaste
mixed caste. saturn and the 

anthills. ooJ.r ioiti"
Rahu denotesm urti-coloured crother* u 

Lead i.tu 
and blue gem E .

belong to Rahu and Ketu ,rpr"r,- 
the sun, the U';r;;""ir,

Moon, Mercury, Mars and saturn 
govern io 

saffron, ti.i, 
sirken, red silken, white sirken, 

and uru"irjr't""]'iro
multi-colouredr obes.
Notes : ,rChandola" is translated as outcaste, 

additionalty thouch 
means one it

cruel in OeeOs( fitel;;;:;: 
instance). It further f*

meansa  person ilregaty 
(4rh aoro to--i'iua-i

caste in Hindu tradition of ancient days) 
Brahmana father 

mother. a-"n. d
Ketu denotesa  person U"_' 

intercaste tnr"rgt 
marriage.

authorities hotd the following view.about 
,ob* planetary

lor" 
The Sun-coane, the Moon_new, 

, Mars_burnt, 
J piter-of Mercurv

:-ryr:r soakedu r ecen-Gt il-U"i"J;;; 
durable,S aturn-torn, il;;:

Rahu-multi-cJloureda na
torn. f  eiu_ilricn

t.ftdgqrttrrq gvrrratn 
q?as ftqo: 

qqf r
fHqr {rcfq 6qr fuq:r rv{rr

'.  tqdsfr, gffa: d+q f{rft,* 
srtel &q ! r

r TRTRrqirq f*: +*qtcet Grq!  rrvqrr
' 45-46. PLANETARY SEASONS .. 

Varsha, Vasanta, 
Sarad, Greeshma,

H emanta and Sisira are the six 
governed Ritus,6;;;;

b y Venus, M1s, Mo9n, Mercury, 
Rahu Jupircr 

and Ketu and Saturn.
denote g months I .oiths respectively.

Notes : Sincet h-eS un is "oa 
the cause

not o f the 
specifically seasons,h e 

a llotted is
any season. However, 

ruler of the 
Greeihma Sun is a 

Ritu co-
apart from Mars.



38 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

The durations of Ritus ot seasonsa re as follows :
Vasanta - 20th March to l9th May

' Greeshma - 20th MaY to l9th JulY
Varsha - 20th July to l9th September
Sarat - 20th Septembetro  19th November
Hemanta - 20th Novembert o l9th January
Sisira - 20th JanuarYto  lgth March

But in the matter of lost horoscopy, a different nomen-
clature is followed by many to ascertain natal Sun's placement
by Ritu. For details, pleases eep age1 2 of my English render'
ing of Nashtr Jatako.

rrfrt(rlfir6{it fqiqr qqQq(: I

Til{-d q{qd $FT(T dtqiilFl: nYetl
, , 47. DHATU, MOOLA AND JEEVA DIVISIONS.' Dhatu
plenetsa re Rahu,M ars, Saturna nd the Moon while the Sun and
l.ous are Moola planetsM. ercury,J upiterand Ketu rule Jeevas'

Notes : The divisionso f Dhatu (metals), Moola (roots,

vegetableest c.) and Jeeva (living beings)h avea great use in
horarya strology,p articularlyt o know the unexpresseqdu ery' If,
for example,R ahu is in the ascendanot r is a significantp lanet in

nolary urt, then the query relates to a metal. For a fuller
" "t 
apprcciation, seeB huvlna Deeprka of PadmaP rabhuSoori'

qt5 q"A lalsRe uql famnt6:I 
*dtr+ qdqrrq qqTlil Gq(f,q ! ttvqtt

48, SATURLV.'  Out of all the planets Saturni s the eldest
(i.e. with the highesta ge). He bestows maximum number of

,yearsi n NaisargikaD asa'

il} gl sq: $irn rdf qlawql gtn I

Wt{tni 6qlie rfirdr it=it(wlq:l lYQ'tl
$nfl EqrT dscelvqfitctrsar qfrdl ?tQtTI : 
siilE q<qd ;itri frtqiei: xrftfaaq1 11oll

49-50. EXALTATION AND DEBILITATION : For the
sevenplanetsfromthesunon,thesignsofexaltat ionarerespec.
livety iries, Taurus, Capricorn, Virgo, Cancer,P iscesa nd Libra'



Chapter 3 39
The deepeset xaltationd egreesa re respectively 10,3,2 g, 15, 5,
27 

1nd 20 in those signs. And in the sevenths ign from tle saij
exaltations ign each planet hasi ts own debilitation. rne same
degreeso f deepe xaltationa pply to deepf all.

_ Notes : Each planeta ssumes ignificancein  a certains ign.
In the opposite sign therefrom,i t is debilitated. Even in i=he
exaltations ign or the debilitations ign,i t is veryhighlyf avourable
or highly detrimentala s the casemay be, in a ieriain degree.
For example, the Sun is exalted in Aries and is the most
powerful on the 10th degreet herein. In Libra hegetsd ebilitat-
ed and if be in lOth degree of Libra, he is worst affected.,
Similarlys uitabled eductionsb e madef or other planets.

As for the exaltationsa nd debilitation of the nodes,t here
are different views. Pleases eep age2 0 of my Englisht ranslation
of Horasaraf or necessaryin formation.

r*: fQ rqiqnqq farlqqqt F{rq r
s=qfi{a*Ti  ;rinrfteo}urqqts{w:n {ttl
tisrfvneg qtqta fattqqqi .F{q{ |
si{ qercq ffrrrqrg{d qsin{Tiltfir:n {Rtl
rir: q;qi{rfi'r: s}{d fefi}qq{i FrrT{| 
qfi Eqrtm dtqrq fafi)qqqi Fqq{ utQn
g+ {fi{q fccd{rRar}urqqi Tqq{ |
vri: gr$ qqivrwq fa*qqqi €qq{ u{vtl

5l-54. ADDITIONAL DIGNITIES .. In Leo the first
20 degreesa re the Sun'sMoolatrikona while the rest is his own

lllli;,,*
thc first 12 dcgreesin  Aries as Moolatrikona with the rest there-
in becomings imply his own house. For Mercury,i n Virgo the
first 15 degrcesa re exaltationz one,t he next 5 degreesM oolatri-
kona and the last 10 degreesa re own house. Ihe first one third
of Sagittariusis  the Moolatrikona of Jupiter while,t he remain-
ing part thereofi s his own house. Venusd ividesL ibra into two
halvesk eepingt hc first as Moolatrikona and the seconda s own
house. Saturn'sa rrangementsa re samei n Aquariusa s the Sun
hasi n Leo.



40 Brihat ParasaraHora Sastra

fat}wq TqK'g<q-({rs?iqq'tuqlq:ergHql:  I
gEEl f<qq{qri fiet{q}qqerqqfi: u{$l

55. NATURAL RELATION^SIIIPS.'Notet he signsw hich
are the 4th, 2nd, l2th, 5th, 9th and the 8th from the Moolatri-
kona of a planet. The planetsr uling such signsare it! friendst
apart from the lord of its exaltations ign. Lords other than these
aie its enemiesl.f  a]planetb ecomesit s friend asw ell as its enemy
(on accounto f the said two computationst)h en it is neutral or
equal.

Notes : A simplef ormula is giveni n this slokat o compute
planetaryr elationships.F rom the Moolatrikonas ignof a planet,
ihe 2nd,4th,5th,8th,9tha nd l2th lords arei ts fr iends. The
resty iz.3 rd,6th,7rh, l0th and llth lordsf rom Moolatrikona
are its enemies. The exaltation sign's lord is always friendly
even if he ownst he 3rd,6th,7th, lOthor the llth from Moola-
trikona. If, however,f riendship and enmity occurs imultaneo-
usly nonep revailsbut equalityo r neutrality.

Take for examplet he case of Mars. The Moolatrikona
for him is Aries. The I lth lord from there is Saturna nd hence
he is inimical. But he is as well a friend, as he is the lord of
exaltations igno f Mars. Sincew c get enmityon onec ountand
friendshipo n the other, Saturn becomese qualt o Mars. Take
aeaint he relationshipo f Venus. He ownst he 2nd and ?th from
tfr'eM oolatrikona oi Mars, thus becoming friend and enemy
respectively. Henceh e is neutralt o Mars.

Seet ablebelow for an easyg raspo f relationship: 

Planet Friends Enemies Dquals

Sun Moon, Mars,J upiter Venus,Sat Mercury

Moon Sun,M ercury - Mars, Jup,
Venus,S aturn

Mars Sun, Moon, Jupiter Mercury Venus,S aturn

Mercury Sun,V enus Moon Mars,Ju piter
Saturn

Jupiter Sun,Moon, Mars, MercuryV, enus Saturn

Venus Mercury, Saturn Moon, Sun Mars, J'rpiter

Saturo Mercury, Venus Sun,Moon, Mars Jupiter



ahapter 3 4l

The Moon doesn ot consider anyonea s her enemya s per

the folloiving statement of Parasara (Benares edition by

Chaukamba" ffqrq alil fqq;E5*fira rfi: tqqw'{tT: meanning

meaning further that the Sun and Mercury are Moon's
friends while others are her neutrals' Saravali also has an
identicalv iew.

AsforRahuandKetu , the fo l low ingmaybeofadd i t iona l
intcr est.
'' 

Rahu : The Sun, Moon and Mars are his enemies'
Jupiter, Venus and Saturn are his friends' Mercury is his
ncutral.

Ketu : The luminariesa re his enemics' Mars' Venusa nd
Saturn are his friends, while Mercury and Jupiter are his
neutralS.

E{q?sErq-TI€q-€dIFiqTqTR q{Tqtl I
rifli fqsai qffit frsskqa dftqat:l ltqll

s6. TEMPORARY (HOROSCOPIC)R ELATIONSHIPS: 
The planetp ositedi n the l0th, 4th, llth,3rd, 2nd or the l2tlt
frornanotherbecomesm utualf riend. Therei s enmity otherwise.
(-T his appliest o a givenhoroscope)'

Notes : The hints giveni n sloka 55 are to understandt he
constantr elationshipa mong planets. In the presents loka we
are advisedo f planets havinga  certain relationshipb ased on

. their positions,i .e. for givenm oment.I f two are mutually in 4th
and lbth, or in 3rd and llth or in 2nd and l2th, they become
temporarily cordial to each other. Shouldt hey be otherwise,
theie previils mutual temporary enmity. This rule is very simple
and needsn o exPlanation.

R?fili rr fqqd q fq* *<fuftet1 I
fci fqaqqa !t q: {qqqia+ lu\ell
€ql fraf<gti g vr1ia eafb{qil |
q?i fqk€q iqa] EIIittrQt sti a\ ttte tt

57-58. COMPOUND RELATIONSHIP .' Should two
planets be naturallya nd temporarily fiiendly, they become
ixtremely friendly. Friendship on one count and neutrality on
another count make them friendly. Enmity on one count



42 
Brihat pitrasara Hora Sastra

cornbined with afifinity on the other turns jnto 
Enmity equality.

and neutralshipc auseo nly enmity. Should 
enmity in there

oth b b e
manners, extreme enmity is 

astrologer obtained. 
s hourd ihJ

c onsider thcse and decrare
ccordingly. h a oroscopice ffect

Notes : The 1inal relationshrpa, s a resulto f naturala nd
l:.I_n_oluy dispositions is cailed d 
cSqTq E,4. S-fol relationship, 

The same or
i s shownb elowi n uo form :

"u.y 
Speculumo f CompoundR elaito nships

One Another
relationship relationship Net relationship

Friendship + Friendship Extremet nendship t,
Neutrality + Friendship Friendship
Enmity + t,nmlty Extremee nmity
Neutrality + Enmity Enmity
Enmity + Friendship Neutral

It is understoodt hat if therei s friendship with 
thena lson eutrality enmity,

w ill prevail.

eqlti qw $ef gd fat)d qreqfqdq I
T{HSEt luaniQ g rrt{TrH xdtfaal il{qtl
TTTEt TEqI qri s}ld q;q {tarwn*i r
tA{gsetfiir tqq eqiq]il fqqqq: 1!,oll

59-60R. ATIO OF EFFECj"S..A  planet in exaltation
d g ives

fully goo effectsw hilc in Mooratrikonai t is 
cious berert

e ffects o r its 
b y one aispl-

f ourth. It is half L.n.n"iuf 
Its in 

beneficenc its own 
ies  house.

in one- fourth n a frieodly 
sign sign. 

one eighth In an equal,s
of auspiciousd irp";iti;;'is 

effects usetul. 
a re nil The goo<l

in debilitation oi'.".ryt camp. 
effects Inauspicious

a re quite reversew ith refercnceto  what is stated.
sd{rrcqfqqe$il'i{i[ qg$, Rl€1} rfq: I
{q} rrlr ltqre}w: ttir{fsqrwfi: nqltl



Chaptert 43

uqil qusFriT{: 41 eqa'fqn}sa a}qa:t 
qqq{itsa aqdlqra: q[q]q]sfeE]q5uEq Rrl
rRiuwga{q{If+r"rTF!l alqE:
fqaiqlriutie${IrndqsilFFl:r: *gcilqv: uq1tl
gtufnaa: *g, qrigoa: qqtqet 
uxmrwpvit qrn qtqcqt: Tltiil:t lqYtl

6r-64. NON-LUMINOUS UPAGRAI{AS (SUB-
PLANETS) ; Add 4 signs 13 degreesa nd 20 minuteso f arc
to the Sun's longitude at a given moment to get the exact
positiono f the all-inauspiciouDs hooma. ReduceDhooma from
12 signst o arrive at Vyatipata. Vyatipata is alsoi nauspicious.
Add six signst o Vyatipatat o kqow the positiono f Parivesha'
He is extremely inauspicious. Deduct Pariveshafr om 12 signs
to arrive at the position of Ctapa (Indra Dhanus) who is
alsoi nauspicious. Add 16 degrees4 0 minutes to Chapawhich
will give Ketu (Upaketu)w ho is a malefic' By addinga sign to
Upaketu,y ou get the original longitude of the Sun. Theseare
planetsdevoid of splendour which are maleficsb y nature and
causea ffiiction.

Notes : The Aprakasa Grahas or upagrahasa re to be
calculateda s under basedo n the abovef our verses: 

l. Sun + 133020:'  Dhooma
2. Dhooma + 53020':  Vyatipata
3. VyatiPata + l80o : Parivesha
4. Parivesha 53020':  Indra CahPa

(Indra Dhanus)
. 5. Chapa + 16040':  UPaketu( Sikhi)

Upaketu,i f increasedb y 30 degreesw, ill reacht he Sun's
exactBositiona t a givenmoment.

Let us assumeth at the Sun is in Taurus l0 degreesa nd
Calculateth e 5 UPagrahasa, s under :
Sun (400)+133020:'  Dhooma . 173e20'.
Dhooma (l?3020')+ 53020':  VYatiPata : 226040'
Vyatipata (226040')+1 800 : Parivesha : 406040'

(or 46040')
Parivesha (46040')- 53020' : ChaPa = 353"20'
Chapa (353020')+ 16040' : UPaketu : 10o
Upaketu (10")+ 300 := Stm = 400



44
. Brlhat parasara Hora Sastra

It may be seent hat by adding 
calculated 30o 

Upagraha, to Upaketu, 
we the 

reached last
is the tl ie 

basis Sun,so riginal 
f or Upagrahu point which

"ul";i;;;;;."--

{gqqt6t{ {nrgaftqruri{ |
tlil qrrlaaleruri firfil: qriu*Aai nqtrr

65. EFFECTS 
ts the Sun,t he ?F- SaB-LLANETS.. 

al'rc If 
nativc's one 

avnuril'*iirL"line oi these
and the ascendant wbile 

r espectiveiy the Moon
u rro-" r"i.J*irh 

and one of thesew i'
irT,fi,r":i."Jongevity wisdomi.o  l."rur.a LordB rahma,

Nores : If rhe 
l:: tu afflicted

the native's b y one 
d ynasty of these

w ill U pagrahas.
not ,oi."o, 

of all ;; 
sons ;';, 

o r lack there
of sons_. w i'be 

I f toss
Iife.will -'"i the ascendan

comet o pass. its  africted
wiIl The Moon s hort

'conjunction' n,'"i"" il;;;
""r r . f 

of an Up"a 
l;;i;";;." ' ril,i t",i 
graha "t ;X,"::t"T,::

* itt 
as 'affiiction' tf," Tun. 

for we 
rhc better 

Sui. can treat it
excep Jol;un", 

Vr yatipat"a;; ;..;;; 
any of the 

; five
i.?;,,i,.J,ili. "; ,;i, rromt hee xample



Chapter 3 45
tion into eight equal parts and distribute thesec ommencing
from the 5th weeklord. in the ei th lon ls
lesswhile Saturn's portion is

51q), Mars'Portion is
s- h. 'a. ntaKaano
idffins) olr, apply to different places (bommensurate
with variabled ay and night durations).

Notes : Ardha Prahara,YamaghanlakdM, rityu, Kala and
Gulika are the 5 Kala Velas, suggestedby the sage. The day
durationa ccordingt o latitudei s divided into eight equalp arts,
The eighthp ortion is unlorded. The first portion is allotted to
the weekd ay lord. Other portions follow in the order of week
day lords. We consider rtions ignoring that of
the Moon and Venus. portlons , Mars, -vlercu

are
Jamaghantakaa nd Gulika.

In the caseo f nfifri]Ifi?dffiIi6is or l/8th partsa rea llotted
in a differentorder. The first portion goest o the planetr uling
the 5th weekdaylord counted from the day in question. The
othersf ollow in the usual order. Here again, the 8th part is
lordless. The planetary portionsf rom Kala to Gulika arc the
samei n nomenclaturei,n  the night also.

Guliks and Mandi are one and the samea nd.notd ifferent.
. This is borne by the statemenot f Parasara(v ideB rihat Parasaia
Hora Sastra,c h. 4, sloka 15, BenaresHindi edition of Chauk-
hambha Sanskrita Sansthana)v, iz. "Namantaramt u tasyaiva
Mandirityabhidheeyate"T. his quarter is not availablein  our
version. In this connection,p leaser efer to prasnaM arga and
JatakaParijatha.

Keerantrru Nataraja of Jatakalankaram( Tamil version)
gives signs of dignities for . these Upagrahasand Gulika elc.
The samei s as under :

Upagraha Exaltation Debilitation Swakshetra
& Gulika etc. (own sign)

Dhooma Leo Aquarius Capricorn
Vyatipata Scorpio Taurus Gemini
Parivesha Gemini Sagittarius Sagittarius( ?)



46 Brihat ParasaraH ora Sastra
Indrachapa Sagittarius Gemini Cancer
Upaketu Aquarius Leo Cancer
Gulika Aquarius
Yamaghantaka ' Sagittarius- 
Ardhapiahara uemrnl
Kala C"pri.oro
Mrityu Scorpio

--
From the Sun to Saturn, no one is exalted in the above_

mentioned exaltation signs, nor debilitated in the above
mentionedd ebilitations igns.

f - - Out of the 5 Kalavelas,v iz. Gulika etc. four exceptK ala
(relate-d

/ to  the Sun) haveo wn signs ystemi n the respectivesi gns
/ ruled-b y their fathers. Gulika, son of Saturn,h asA quariusa s
| 9*i house. Jupirer,ss on, yamaghantakah, as it in Sagittarius.
I Ardhaprahara,M ercury's son, is in own sign if in bemini.
I Mrityu, sono f Mars hasS corpioa s own house. It is not known
I why_Kalaa,  son of the Sun shifted to Capricorn, a signo f his
I brother (Saturn) leaving his father,s Leo. Obviously] Saturn
I hasg iven his Moolatrikona to his son Gulika while he gave
I Capricorn( a secondarys ign)t o his ,brother' Kala.
t

gfcmtaavrrcet(rt{E  q( TEfT{t{rqr|T  . j
gfqqi sltafr irerrvinrrfiFrrs i{ eiq u\eotl

70. GULIKA'S POSITION s The degreea scendinagt  tne
time of start of Gulika's portion( asa bove)wiil bet he longitude
of Gulika at a givenp lace. Basedo n this longitudeo nly, Gnlika's
effectsf or a particularn ativityb e estimated.

Notes : The day duration or night duration as the case
may be for calculationt he five. Kalavelasv, iz. Gulika etc. be
consideredfo r the latitude of birth. Somea uthoritiess uggest.
to uset he end of the period for ascertaininglo ngitudeso f tf,ise. {
SageParasara'vsi ew is correcti n this respecta, s exemplifiedin 
the notesf or slokas2 5-30, ch. 4 infra. .,Mandi" and .iculika"
are interchangedin  our own text to meano ne and the same.

qiuqssi: sriqrrrqqifemlqrrn r
ssqrRsatlqr;dT {{ ffurd A iq ,ro1,t



Chapter 3 47

Qear6ri{ qalfiq fasflud rrTfEqiq  q( |
qrrqBqirtsf rilE] {sl {q} ge ll\eRlt
qa qMqEI(d irtqT{ iiri faqtf,q !t
ffiq farloi gf q <si qrqqd aa llelll
qT$t EI?q ftqrt'tqrf,t,itrepisfq q I
sriqrqfi fffii AE TqI( iTaIv emE{ a}q ttuvtt

7l-74. CALCULATION OF PR,ANAPADA.'C onvert the
given time into vighatikasa nd divide the same by 15. The
resultant Rasi, degreese tc. be added to the Sun if he is in a
movable sign which will yield Paranapada. If the Sun is in a
fixed sign, add 240d egreesa dditionally and if in dual signadd
120d egreesin  furtherancet o get Pranapada. The birth will be
auspici-ouisf  Pranapadaf alls in the 2nd, 5th, 9th, 4th, 10thor
llth from the natal ascendant.I n other houses, Pranapada
indicatesa n inausPiciousb irth.

Notes : The calculation of PranapadaL agna is exemplified
below,a s Per the aboves lokas: 

Assumeb irth is at l6gh 25vi. When this is convertedi nto
vighatikas,w e get 985. Divided by 15, this yields 65.66'Rasi
which means6 5 signsa nd 20 degrees. Expungingt he multiples
of 12, we have5 s 200o r 1700.

The next step is to add this straightawayt o the Sun's
tongitudei f he is in a movable sign. Supposet he Sun is in
Aries 15degreesw, e get 170*15:185 or Libra 5 degreeass 
Pranapadaa scendant.

In the samee xampleif  the Sun is in a fixed sign,sayT aurus
15 degreesw, e have to add another 240 degreesS, o to say,45
(the Sun)+240*170:455 or 95 degrees(C ancer5  degreesa)s
Pranapada sceadant.

Again, alternativelyi f the Sun is in a dual sign,say Gemini
150,w e havet o add only 120 degreesi n placeo f 240 degrees.
That is 75 (Sun'sl ongitude)*120*170:365:50 Ariesi s Prana'
PadaL agna' 

Dear Reader
We are  g lad  Y< lu  Are  read lng
t n l s  U n l q u e  B o o k . S o r n e  o t h e r

::l?lll"?n":f f 5il ll "n
mate r l a l ' a re  g l ven  l n  1Ls
I I nd  Pa r t .  P l ease  w r l t e



sIsT( tfl{rtET$rrls4Tu4v:t l
Chapter 4

Zodiacal signs Described
BTEkrrq gaf'.-ackq 6lnstfwaair 
irrEl fqarrqriuf silraddse alq rr1 n
q{oaqilT;qEi't fqrq: fi,lqsq) Hmiq: r
ilFqr-S'rR fq*u ,{ {qrtqfEqrwq: u?tl

l-2. IMPORTANCE OF HORA.. The word Hora /xlrr)
is derivedf rom Ahoratra (erqtcra)a fter dropping the nrit*anl
last syllables. Thus Hora (ascendantsr)e mains in between
Ahoratra (i.e. day and night) and after knowing Hora, the good
and bad effectso f a nativeb e known. sri Vishnu,t rreI nviiible,
is Time personified. His limbs are the 12 Rasis commencing
from Aries.

lql $wq frga: rei-feq-gmRwr: 
gFrtfqs{il *Ig,i* 5rq} {lmraa: .o*r *lil

3. NAMES OF ^t/G//.t .. The 12 signs of the zodiaci n
order are : Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra,
'Scorpio,S agittariusC, apricorn,A duariusa nd pisces.

dlqtci tqT qr6 €irleit'le*tilq: r
gpfttqR qrj{,i i wg,.q+e tqru vtl
q{qft a} ilfl }qril *qr: {irqf<rt:T qrq I

4-4t. LIMBS OF KALA?(|RUSHA.. The timep ersonified
hash is limbsa s under with referencct o the 12 signsr espect-
ively : Head,f ace,a rms, heart,s tomachh, ip, spaceb elownlvel,
privities,t highs,k nees,a nklesa nd feet.

Notes : The limbso f Kalapurushao r Time pcrsonifieda re
divided treating Aries as ascendant. For an individual,t he
ascendings ignw ill denote head,2nd sign face and so on and so
forth. Seethediagramg ivenbelow in the case.ofaS corpio
native,f or an easygrasp.



Chapter4 49

(8 )
Privities

(g)

Thighs

( ro)
Knees

( l r )
Ankles

The use of the above is to know of the planetary influencec
on the concernedl imb. In the abovec ase,i f Rahu is in Scorpio
ascendantt,h ere will be a scar etc. on the head. Or whcn his
Dasa starts,i f he is affiicted at birth, he will caused angert o
head. The limbs related to malefics will suffer defects and
adversitiesw hile the ones relatedt o benencs will be beautiful'
strong and immune to danger. These are stloola (broad)
sctrerie. Fot Sookshma( minute) schemeo f limbs, the 36 deca-
natesa re resorted to.

' q<ti'nGrEmr{t: TqrTt mReql ttttt
fr<rfrsfametqq{ttiml{q frqns: I

5-51. CJ.iISSIFICATION OF 'S/Gil'S Movable, Fixed
"

and Duafale the namesg ivent o the 12 signs  in order' These
arb again known \asr nalefica nd benefic, successively. Similarly
thesJ are male and female. Aries, Leo and Sagittarius ar€
bilious. Taurus, Virgo and Capricorn are windy' Gemini,
Libra and Aquariusa re mixedw hile the resta re phlegmatic'

Notes i The 12 signsa re divided into movablef,i xed and
dual. Movable are Aries, Cancer, Libra and Capricorn' The
signsT aurus,L eo, Scorpioa ndA quariusa re fixedo r immovable.
Gimini, Virgo, Sagittariusa nd Piscesa re dual or cQmmon'



50 BrlLat Parasara 11ora Sasffa

Arics, Crcrnini, Leo, Libra, Sagittariusa nd Aquadusa re
qal€-!F. Thess are also known as malefic or,fnlcl signs.
S-urus7'Cancr,V irgo, Scorpio,C-apffi rc
signs, Thesea le bg?efic1gt.9.1gs9ifgt ns. *

Arics and iB trinesa rc bilious. Taurus and its trinesa rc
wi{}. Gcmini-andi tg trincc havea  mix of all the threet emper-
andnts'v iz. bilc, wind andp hlegm. canccr and its triaesarc
phlcgmatic.

The temperanetts of the signs have a upecific use in
dedicel astiology. If, for erample, a phlegmaticrign happens
to be the 6th housoa nd is occupiedb y an arilictealu phlcgm t c nei witn

a itc mpcrsmentt,u berculosisr,e yerec ougb and othei
pulmonaryd isordersw ill crop up. If a windy sifr is africted
by a windyp lanet,r heumatismc,o lic,sp, aralysise tc. will trouble
the native. when e biliousp laneat ffectsa  biriouss ign,o ne will
be liablet o prematureg rcy hair, ycilowishb odn iecretiono i
bile, jaundicee tc. If a mixcds igngetsa ffectedb y Mercur-y,t hc
nstivc wil bc predisposcdt 

 
o suffer many inrbalances.T he

planetsh avc bcar describeda s windy, phlegmatica nd bilious
as couldbe rceni n ch. 3 oupra.

qFqUil K{tTrerqitqrcffqqiq't,,,,,
fitn* gtttfc: ffi! rqlgqft I
pkfr qrdsf t Mrr gUrfutr: rsrr

6-7. ARIES DESCRIBED.T. he signA riesi s btood:redin 
complexion. lt hasa  promincnt( big) physique. It is a quadr_
upcdsign., and strong during night. It denotesc ouragi. It
residesin .the castand is relatcd to kings. It wandersin  uitt,
and predominateins  Ra.logun(ar. q'qi s the sepondo f the three
constituenqt ualitiesa nd is thc -tauseo f great activityi n living
beings). It risesw ith its back( a prishtodayas i!n) and is fieryl
Its ruler is Mars.

r?e: qsrfqfr Ehirqgqrq{{Wt r
qt*t wttil qfo$qw: Eatcal qrT:n ctl

8. TAARAS DESCNBED.. Its complexioni s white, and
is lorded by Venus. It is_longa nd is a quadrupeds ign. lt 1",
strength in night and residesi n the south. rt represeitsv ilases
and businessmen. An earthy sign,T aurusr ir.s oitt its l;;;*"



Chqtet 4 5l

fiffi TFTri Frtri it sfrllq{l
rir{rrtffit qrqrqlfiqt iletl
ernrel (ffi fqxatd lutfrl: t

9-9I. GEMINI DESCNBED.' The sign Geminir lsesw ith
its hesda nd representas malc and a female holdinga maoca nd
lute. It livesi n the westa nd is an ,airy sigo. Itis a bipedeign
as bell and is strongi n nights. It lives in villagesand is windy
'mt emperament. It hasa n evenb ody with grcengrashsu c. Its
nrler is MercurY.

qraqlT{qrtt q rrgqil Cfit {tiqr{llloll
qEq|itqq: wlonag: *itgnft ErFitl 
geafi tf,cfnl'rrffilfr: rtlil lltlll

l0-ll. CANCER DESCRIBED. ' The sigpC -anccris pale
rcd. It resortst o forestsa nd representBs rebmins. It is atrong
tn nights. It has manyf eet (i.e. it is a centipcdce igp)a nd hrr s
bulky body. It is Srtwic in disposition(s eenin  godr)a nd is a
wateryB ig!. It risesw ith its backa nd is ruled by the Moon.

frqr gqlfuq: qtqt qgqra qffi qdt t
qfrqH qgqrrr":vrq: tiq g*iot1 lltRrl

12. LEO DESCRIBED .' Leo is ruled by the Sun and is
srtwic. It is a quadrupeds ign and a royal sign. It resortst o
forestsa nd risesw ith its head. It has a large, whitc body' It
residesi n the easta nd is day-strong.

qtri*qrq t'illten qftrffieit
itq?<st tt qgqirnf tqlqputra q fi llllll

- flqrqq'-flr nqqt filaqqt qqF{fr |
gnrfr ffifi t{flt qtqqr.Tr tflfuvt lltvll

|3. |4 'VIRG,DE91RIBED..Thissignisahi l l . resortcr '
and is strong in day-time. It rises with its head and has a

medium build. It is a biped sign and resideq in tbc south' It

bas grains and fire in its hands. It belongst o businessc onllnu-
nity and is variegated. It relatest o hurripanes (mF flfi)' It is



52 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

a Virgin and is Tamasa( a disposition of demons)..  Its ruler is
Mcrcury.

dffi q*eicwge: gwft rsilguitI 
qfiq{t {qt wiit qil rwag6ot" ntrrr
{Ftsk}sq rqcqtilqE $rGrrr} fffi r
dm'!il ffiuq: fqdrft qttqqQ!u tqtl
tlqssQsfrfieqrnf $qt,ta gmrfurr: 

15-161L. IERA AND SCORPIODESC:RIBE:D L ibrb is
a Seershodayoeig nr isingwith its heada nd is strongi n day time.
It is black in comple5iona ndi s predominantw ith RaJogunr.
It relatesto tho westerndirection and resortst o land. It is
dcstructiveo r mischievou(safa-fl. It representsS udraso r the
4th Varna and hasa medium build and is a biped sign. Its
lord is Vcnus.Scorpiohasa  slendepr hysiquea ndi s a centipede
rign. It denoteeBrahminsand residesin  holc. Its direction
is north and is etrong in day time. It is reddish-browna nd
rcrorts to water and land. It hasa  hairy physiquea nd is very
rharp (or passionatc). Man is its ruler.

$ftrtr Fre qtq{qTfr rr flfilrt: rrlerl
ffi frtirffqqs qFn6q: ffi frmq t
qf{rqt rritGqn: ffiqri agrir: tl le ll
{iFil Egunr<l terd rwn Eil: I

l?-181. SAGITTARIUSD ESCRIBED: The signSagitt-
ariusr ises with its head and is .lordedb y Jupiter. It is a
Setwics igr and is tawnyi n hue. It has strengthin  nighta nd
is fiery. A royal sign, Sagittariusi s biped in first half. Its
secondh alf is quadruped. tt hasan evenb uild and adores
an arch. It residesi a the east, resortst o laad andi s splend.
orous.

q?ilfqqlrfr qtqt qirte.q frfu *{q ltt Q,rr
1r6\8fr lpiln": Fqi(} qtqqq: I
qrd qgGq*?fr g fsq{1 qqql r*r: llRoll

19-20. CAPRICORN DESCRIBED .' C;apricorni s lorded
by Satugr,atri has predominance of Tamoguna (a disposition



Clmpter 4 5t

seen in demons). It is aa earthy eign and rcprercnts the
southernd irection. It is strongi n nights,and riscsr vith back.
It hasa largebody. Its complexionis  vatiegateadnd it resortg'
to both forestsand lands. Its first half is quadrupcda nd second
half footlessrn ovingi n water.

Err* g*ff a<} lgn!il qcl1irgftl1ql
qdtfr EnFrw€fr q6{frqtd ilr: llRlll
{rF: qf{qqtds tar{t tql6f(: qF: I

2l-21t. AQUARIUS DESCRIBED. ' Thes igr Aquarius
representas m an holdig a pot. Its complexionis  decp-borwn.
It hasa .mediumb uild and a biped sign. tt is vcry atrong in

,zdty tnte: It resortst o deep waterand is airy. It rises with
its heada nd is Tamaslc. It rules Sudras,t he 4th Varna and
the west. Its lord is Saturn,t he Sun'so ffspring.

dfdt giqnqdcrql dtr<tfcfrnql{} trRttt
q* qiagon6pq s€{fr q61qt frq: t
crq* qcq+dt '

s Rlq€ql Er.q*{fr uRln 
gilqndfqqqift wiht q&ei Wn:t 
fatqwtmfirqt tt fllmlcqwFl t llRull

' 22'24. PISCES DESCNBED .' Piscesr eccmblesa  pair of
fisb, one tailed with the hcad of the other. Thir rign is nlght-
strong. It is I watery sigo and b predominant with Srtwa gur.
It denotes resoluteness and is a water-regorter. It is footless
and has a medium build. It rules the north and risesw ith both
headand back. It is ruled by Jupiter. This is how the 12 Rasis
each of 30 degrce erteot are dcscribed to cvalu,ate $o$ rnd
specific effecis.

ltrrtiT: qrsqqqfq 
"IgGa gfr{qq I

ffqwd q d{frsq F{,i{i qffiq nRul
aEt {rlasrfq ittq I i{ fqur<q t
nrilrqtnr{ qffi fiiri s{srq qq iltqrl
qfcq rnl fertfr qq{ilFr qt*tiq?ilq r
trrdsffanf,t doi qtq rnnft qt|ri ttqsrt



31 &lrrlartP qawa llora Sastts

{rflRdhmi iduq6 nt f*fuqq r
qqrat*T'nnrt*tmnq{r l lRql l
n{rrt wqiFlr|d rfutrt gftrlf r
ecilqqtltd fiqi 'r{?nns frftm: nRerr
gnltlF qtq ffifrq?i qrd wnl
W fiffii Hq tt{on

25it0. 'NISHEKA LAGNA,. O excellento f rhe rr8cc,
rrflrlndd not lg r ctept o rrrlve rt the Nisbeke Llgna wtcn tbc
rrtrl uccdnt b knom. Notc tho anguh distrme betreca
@ullle). Add tbls to thc dlfferenceb ctteen
llr uccorlrnt Lrglr bbrvr (Madhyr or cusp)snd the 9th bbvr
(cql.Ibe roltrnt po&ct in Rrsls, dcgreese tc. will reprtrd
ib noatlc, &yr cfc. thrt elapsedbetreen Nlshetr sndb lrfr.
At bhth tf tlc uccrdrnt lord ls In the invlclble hdf (t.e. frou
uccndentd crrp b &ecedentsl cmp) rdd the degrecrc tc. thc
Moa rorcd h fh pertlcular Rasl occupledb y bcr to the .rboye.
rootloncd product.f hGF SGt scendrntr t Nlrhetr crn be worled
out rd the goodr od bd erperiencebdy ttc uatlrp b tbe romb
cu F ifosccd. Onc canr lso guess,w lth the belpof Nlshekt
Irt!., rfrectr lllo longevlty,deathe tc. of thc parents.

Notcr : If birth time is accurately noted, we can tracc
oot the corroct timo ond dateo f coitust hat causcdth e concept-
ion in quection. Adhana lagna or Nisheka LsgDam eans the
gscendantth at prevailedr it tbc time of coitusa nd not the onea t
comcptlon. The Sanslrit word 'Adhana' or 'Nishcks' neansa 
ronral cohabitation. (Sone tcxtsc all the first union betwecn a
oouplc ar 'Adbarna'andt he latero nesi n the usual couroeag
'Nishctr'.)

Ar per our prcscntv cttes,we considert hc birth chart of a
mrle child born on Friday, tbe lTth February 1984a t 22h 3Sm
IST at New Delhi. Tbe birth time hasbeen correctlyn oted
with c spcciarl cquest to the ottendingd octor. The time of
coitucw ar rstrologically chosena nd promptly notedd own in
thc rccotdo. And hence thie cssew ill scrve as a foolpro of
cxamplo. Tie natusa s.perI atriri Ayanams(ai. e. 230 gi' St")
is givenb elow :



Chryter4 5:t

Ascdt
Saturn
Gulika
Mars

'fhe longitudcso f rcquired planets and important crlspg
are as given below :

AscendantC usp : 18202 3' 06" 9th cusp : 6400 3' 13"
lOth cusp or M.€. ! 940 36' 06" Gulika : -2ii0+8o0  32' 06"
Saturn ' iq2: t::3g' Moon , ti' oo"

SidereaTl ime at birth : 8h lm 2ls
The longitude of Gulika is cast for the beginning of

Saturn'g Muhurta, as suggestedb y the sagei n ch.3 supra.
With the abow data, we 6bould be able to trace bock the

Adhana date and time. The formula is :

Adhanri lagna:Date of birth and time minus "x"
where" X" is obtainedt hus: A+B+C

Now A, B and C are explained. "A" is the angulard ist-
anceb etween Saturn and Gulika at birth. ''8" is the distance
betweent he cusp of the sscendanta nd that ofthe 9th house
counted in a direct order (i.e. via 4th and 7th cusps). "C" is
required if the ascendantlo rd is in the invisible half (i.e. ascen'
dant and descendant interscctedb y the nadir'). Otherwise," C"
is not required. In the examplec ase,t hesca re :



56 lrlttu, ParasaruE ora Sarrha

A : 5" 46'28"
B : 241" N Vl"
c =s 14" lT N"

:26lo 4r' 35" - 26ld 43gh3 5 vigb.

It will bc aoticcd that I degreeir  troateda s one day io thc
rboVo computation. Thst is, these are Savanaman(a3 60 days
per year). To apply this to Grcgorbn Calendar( NS), we must
rcduoet his duratiol ioto Saunmam. Sucht ablcoare given in
my Faglirh trtnolation of Honsan. From there we take the
corroctionf igurecs o that wo obtrin an equslSauramamd urat-
ion. Thosec orroctlonst rc meantt o know the differenceb etween
Saranamanaa nd Sauramrna. When wc reducet be correction
factor from Savanamanalo  obtein Sauramanat,he figure eo
obtained shsll have to bc iocrca$d by the conectionf actors
cxcessivelcyo nrideredi n the first mentioned corrcctionf actors.
A reader evcn with averagei ntelligencewill apprccirtc tbig
cxercise.F rom the tablegr cferred wc obtain corroction facton
.for 26ld.43gh3 5vighas undcr :

i d  sh vigh Lip Villpta
200day':r : 2  55 l6 56 40
60 days 0 52 35 05 00
I day; 0 00 52 35 05

43 .58gb :0  (X ) 38 00 00

Gorrcclion : 3 49 22 36 45
*l*-.-..;-

We can tatc the above fgure to bc 3d 49dh2 3 vigh as a
round figure for conveniencsek c. Whent bis corrcctionf actor
isdcductsdf rom 26ld 43gh 35vigh,r veg et 257d 54ghl 2vigh,
Thie needc8  slight incrcared uet o ercessivec orrectionc ontained
by the aboveo orrectionf actor, 3d 49gh2 3vigh. From the same
tablc, we get a factor of 3gh 22 vigh which shouldb e addcdt o
25?d5 4ghl 2vigh. Thus we get 257d57gh3 4vigh. That is, thc
Adhanso ught to bavcbcenr c many days behindt he birth date
while thc birth is on l?th Fcb l9fff at 22-35h n Thc time of



Chaptet 4 57

Adhanaa s notedi g : 4th June 1983at 10.40P M, IST, at New
Delhi. (Ihe last mensesp eriod,o r LMP date, 8s recordcdis 
3l-5-1983.) Thc duratioo betweent he two is shown below
monthby month.

(
Montb Days Hrs Mltr

June 1983 26 0l 20
Jnly 1983 31 00 00
August1 983 31 00 00
Septembe1r 983 30 00 00
Octobcr1 983 3100m
Novembe1r 983 3p 00 00
Dccembe1r 983 31 00 00
January1 984 3l .00 00
February1 984 16 22 35

' I

Total gsp 257 2t 55

: 257d 59gh. 47.5V igh
Theaboved urationi n June1 983devoido f 3d 22h4 0m as

Adhana took placc on 4th at the said hour. Similarly, in
February8 4, the duration is considereodn ly upto the momeat
of birth. For catculationo f ghatis,1 2 midnighti s treated8 s thc
sqrting point as Eogtishd atesbegina t 12 midnight.

The readerw ill note that we got the actualduntion bet-
weenb irth and coitus counted backwardsu  257 59Ch4 7 Svigh
whereasw ith tho help of the rules, wc could get 257d 57gh
34 vigh, having a differenceo f less rhrn 2.5 ghatir. This
differencei s not iacxplicabic. We bavec onsideredthe longitu-
dinal differenceo f I degreee quallinga day (of 60 ghatis). This
meaaco nem inuteo f longitudeis  one ghati. Sincct he birth time
and coitur time haveb ecn perfectlyn oted,t he differencec ould
be attributcd to not consideringt hc fractionof secondo f arc in
6e variousl ongitudesT. hus2 .5g h differencemcans2 .5 minutes
of arc. Plcasen ote that we havc totally used the longitudeso f
fve positionsv, iz. ascendant9, th house,G ulika, Saturn and
Moon. A small fractioa of secondso f differencea t evervs tagr
'can well clure somed ifrerencc.



58 biilnt ?arasamE dra Sastra
Alboit the timo of coitus (or Adhana) has b€qNr ocorded

propetly and albeit we got the samo by revcrseproccssw ith the
help of birth time as per Meharghi'spdnciplob, ne mayb e yct
wonderingw hetherit  ir a coincidcnoe.T o allay sucha  miscon-
ception,wem ake againa n exerciseto  arrivea t the birth date
and time in a forrr,ardm annerw ith the hetpo f coitus time
indicatcda bove. trns ucha  processw, e considero nly classical
rulega sp cr standardb ookso n Hindu Astrology,i gnoring any
cuggcotiofnro m any ambiguougsu arter.

StrgeI  : Firstly we find out whetherth c. dclivery should
be bcfore2 73d ayso r afrer 271d aysfromA dhcno. The relevant
principlc is from my translationo f Nrshta JrtNkrn whhh
prineiple owes its acknowledgmetnot  ManusbyrJ rtrle rnd
Joiate Srganm.2 73d aysi g the basisa s tbe Moon takes 273.2
dayst o completete n zodiacarte volutions The Adhana charti s
asp er the time 22 40 hoursI ST for June4, l9g3 at New Delhi.
Scet he zodiaca s under asp er Lahiri.Ayanamsa.

c ,1I"i * ,
Moon

4 29"| 5'36"

Ascdt
N t0"20'37"

sat( n)

The Adhana Moon is waningi n statea nd is in the invisible
half of the zodiac. Should the Adhana Moon be waninga nd be
in the invisibleh alf, or with increasingr ays in the visible half,
then the birth takesp lace before 273 daysf rom Adhana. So to
6ay,t he traosit Moon will not completet en revolutions. Adhans



Cluptcr 4 J9

Moon with iacreasing rays in the invisible half or Adhrns Moon
with decrcasingr ays in the visible half will ctuse tbe birth only
after 273 days. To wit, she will in tnosit exceedt en revolutions
of thc firmanenB. [n thc Adhrna chart before us, tbe Moon is
decreasing(i .e. approachhg the Sun) and is in the 2nd house
(i.e. inyirible half). Hehce it suggestsa  posibiiity of delivery
before 273 days. Tbc answeri r known to the reader in tbe'
affirmative.

St4ge2  : It is not enough if re state that the delivery will
be bcfore 273 days. We must narrow down the period still
briefly. The Sun's position at Adhana will tell ur the possible
month of delivery. One of thc rulis in this cootcxt le from
Suhr Jrtrha (vide p. 49 of my English tranglationo f Hon Srn
sttting that deilvery will bc in thc 9th, l0th or I lth month acco'
rding to tho Adhaoa ascendantbcing. in a. movablc sign, fixed
sigp or common eign. In thc casc citcd by me, C;apricorn, a
rnovablcs ign, is onrthe eastsuggestirgd elivery in the 9th month
(i.e. betwesn2 4U270 daYt).

Stgc 3 : .Aftcr the above step, our job is to dig out the
possible.Moons ign at birth. According to Kalyana Varma's
Serrvali (ch.8, Verses 4647), the natal Moon will be either in
the ?th or in the lOth from her Adhana poaition. In the Adhana
cbart before us, the Moon is in Aquarius and hencc the natal
Moon should be Leo or in Scorpio. The readerwill obscrvet he
nalal Moon in Leo'

Stagc { : Leo, aB any other sign, is 30 degreesin length.
Then where ghould"th e Moon exactly be ? Is her birth position
justified vis a vir Adhana position ? This is known by the ascen'
'iantatbirtu. 

( a, 7 q J r.:
The sig;nsA riec, Taunts, Gemini, Canc€r, Sagittariusand

€apricorn are Docturnal signsas tlese are strong during night
time. The other six, viz. Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Aquarius
and Piscesa re called diurnal signsb eing strong during day time.

- If the Adhana Lagna is a nocturnal sign, birth will be in a
day sign. If birth occursi n a night sign, then the ascending
sigu at Adhana should have been a day sign. (tn the Adhana
chart given, the ascendantis  Capricorn-a nocturnal sign and
henceb irth in Libra-a diurnal sign, is justified')

Strge 5 : Nocturnal sign can ascendi n day time as well.
Similarly diurnal sig! can ascend in nigbt time also. If the



6{) brttat ParasaraII on Sastra
Adhana Lagna is a night sign, birth will be in day time and in a
diurnal sign. If the said Lagna is a day sign, birth will occur
in night time in a nocturnal ascendant. The fraction of si

ascendi the

In the Adhana chart given, the ascendanti s Capricorna nd
portion past is lO' 20'37". We conrrrt this longitude into
secondso farc to have accuracyd The longitude thus is 37237,,.
Similarly, 3Odegreesm ake 1,0E,000e econdso f arc. The night
duretion at birth in our examplei s l2h 50m 4gsa s the sunrise
ot 17.21984 is at 6h 59rn 58s and Sunset lgh 9rn l0s, for
New Dclhi. Nqw seet he processa s under :

108000s econds( 30 deg.) : 46248s econdso f time
(or l2h 50m 48s) -

37237(o" rr 0'20'37"' 
I loror*3223?)/108000

. : lS94S.7lls econdosf  time
4.429364h1o urs

: 4h 26n (4h 25m4 5.71s ec)
So to say,4h2 6m havep art from the Sunset,i .e. from

l8h 9m l0s. This denotca2 2h34m 55s which shouldb e the
birth time. And we havc the birth time recordeda  22h3 Sm.
This cannot be a coincidenceo r manipulationf or a serious
studento f astrology like me, but a meaningfula nd scientific
rstrologicapl rocess.

Whent hc Adhsna Mdon's Dwadammsai s knownc orre-
ctly, thc natal Moon canb e well checked. She,at birth, should
bo in the nme Dwadasamsas  shew asat Adhana. Pleasen otc
this agrecability-Adhana Moon as well as natal Moon being
ln CapricornD wadasamsasi mihrty. Henceo ur natalM oon is
Justt he cofiect one.

Anotherv erificationfa ctor, whichh owevern eednot exist
if the Moon'gD wadasamcao incidesis,  : Wbatevert he angular
distsoco is betwecn Adhqna Moon and Adhana Lagoa will
prevailb etwcent he natal Moon aad nstst asc€Ddant.I n our
er8mple, the difrerence between{ dhens Moon and Adhana
r agnoi s 48"44' whereasaatal Moon and Dotal ascendanat re
49'6' aprrt.



Chapter O Ut

The curious reader may note one thing. There are maoy
rules to note the birth month, natal Moon, natal ascendante tc.
with the hclp of Adhana (or prasna). And the correct ones
bringing the variousp ossibilitiest o a coincidentalm anner should
be corectly judged without ruehing to conclusions sinply
theoretically.

Ihus the reader will be convincedof the fact that Adhana
time noted is correct as we got back to the birth details from
Adhana and vlcey ersc ac-curatelyw ithout any ambiguity what-
80ever.

From the saidt wo processebsa sedon accuratelym aintained
recordsf or purposes of scientific research,I , rather we, firmly
can concludet he followiog without a shadowof doubt :

l. Gulika's longitudew ill corrcspond to the beginningo f
Saturn'sMuhurta only, as suggestedb y the sage, irrespectiw of
any other authority stating that it should be for the end of
Muhurta ruled by Saturn. In fact, I have not come acrossa ny
cage'sw ork stating contrarily to what Parasara stated in this
regard. Suppose we have calculated Gulika for the given
birth chatt for the end of Saturn's muhurta, the longitude of
Gulika would bave advancedb y 24 degrees. That would put
the Adhana still 24 days behind the noted date. Pleasen ote that
we have exactly reached the Adh4na date a$ per the record
maintained without any variation. This proves that Gulika
shouldb e at the beginningof Saturn'sM uhurta.

2. AccurateAyanamsai s only that of Lahiri and that accur-
ate it is as to the seoond of arc. This contention is proved by
the fact that we have made use of the Moon's longitude. Other
4 loogitudesu sedby us in the process of getting back to Adbana
are simply angular distancesw hich will not be affected by any
Ayansmsa. But the Moon's longitude will vary plus or minus
accordingt o the Ayanarhsa,a nd Adhana time will be minus or
plus accordingt o the variation. Whereasw ith lahiri's position
of the Moon, we did not experiencca ny anamolyi n the Adhana
computation. Similarly in progressing towards the birth date
from the Adbana date, Moon's longitude playeda  significant
role. If for examplewith anotherAyanamsat,he Moon goest o
Piscesin the Adhana,h er natal position, will yet be in Leo but
inconsistentwith Adhana position. Hence Lahiri Ayanamsa has
all the perfection required for calculationo f event he Nadiamsas.



qq flq{iqqftTTsrttnr:{  r I
Chrptcr 5

Special Ascendants
wnt srqqqdq ilflt faqqiilq t r

lqq lqrql l?ll
l. Oh excellento f the Brahmins, I explain bclow aggin

some special ascendantg,v iz. Bhqva lagm, Hora Iagna and
Ghatika Lagna.

qqTEri rrqtrgr effi ,fq[q t
rqrfil qirqri;d qneiGi atd Q uqrr
tq qeqrffi rfiFrr {qfqqtf{Ei q I
mvqqHq+ q{ qrqwti €ta q ilq ulrl

2-3. BHAI/A LAGNA .' From Sunriset o the time of birth
every 5 ghatis (or 120 minutes) constitute one Btava lagna.
Divide the time of birth (in ghatis, vighatisetc.)f rom Sun-rise
by 5 and add the quotient etc. to the Sun's longitudea s at Sun
rise. This is calledB havaLagna.

Notes : To work out the various ascendantsa, srumet hat
the birth is at l2gh 30vi and the Sun's longitude as prevalenta t
the time of Sun rise is 4s l2'. Find out the BhavaL agna in the
first instancea, s under :

Whenbirth time is divided by 5 we get 2.5 signso r ?5'.
This is to be added to the Sun's longitude as given which is
132". We get 207" or Libra 27' as BhavaL agna.

iln qreiQqfafifirmiteaq kq t l
cflfr ild ffqrq nqd nYrl
qrEqeqrRqiB wi qsqFii tilf{qi qqE I
*eqqtqfq* nr"f Arratti qq Q tq utlt



clspler 5 63
4-5, HORA LAGNA.. Again from Sun-riseti il thc time

of birth, Hora Lagna repeatsi tself every 2| ghatis ti-r-. eO
minutes)D. ivide the time pastu pto birth from the Sunriseb y
2| and add the quotiente tc. in signs,d egreeaen d so on to th;
longitudeo f the Sun rs at the $unrise. This will yield Hora
Legnai n Rasi,d egreeest c.

Notes : [,et us find out the Hora Lagnaf or thc samee xa-
mple.

Birth timc is to bed ivided by 2.5. Whend ones o, we get
5 signso r 150 degrees.A dd this to the Sun'sl ongitudea sa t
runrise( i.e. 132p lus 150-282"). We thus get Hora Iagna as
Capricornl 2'.

tqTrfq rft|{ 'ug iri Bqqfit{ I r
qmacr( vrrrcq qrqffqTqfq rrng tf qtl

qswErrqrfiil qr{ qtnfil wrfrq r
rt{ Efrfiwf rfifti iltqrf{fr: uetr

{trT{r{ ed{cqr: qqnism{t6r: r
n1c4q1qfrqtrr fr q*$ri qe e rq nerr

6-8. GHATT LAGNA (GHATIKA LAGNA)..Now lisren to
the method of working out Ghatika Lagna. This Lagna ctranges
along with every Ghatika (24 minutes) from the Sunrise. Note
the birth time in Ghati and vighatis. Considert he number ot'
ghatisp asta s number of Rasiso r Ghatika Lagnas.T he Vighatis
be divided by 2 to arrive at degreesa nd minutes of arc past
in the said Ghatika l-agna. The product so arrived in Rasis,

. degreesa nd minutes be added to the Sun,s longitude as at
Sunrise to get the exact location of Ghatika Iagna. So say

. sagesli ke Narada.
Notes : Let us find out the Ghatika lagna in the above

examplec ase,
Birth time is 12 ghatisw hich gives 12 Rasis. Vighatisl eft

are 30 which are to be divided by 2 and treated as degrees.
30 divided by 2 yields 15, i.e. 15". Thus, we note 12 signs



64 Btihat Parasara Hora Sastra

15 degreest o be away from the Sun (as at rise of the day).
When l2s l5o or 375oa re added to the Sun (132'), we get 507c
which after expungiog3 60' resultsi n 147" or Leo 27oa s Ghatika
I,agna.

nqriqt q Fr<rti qrqs'lej1 q fmiq t
t qErq{ t aa t eqrrata fncntq ttert

9. USE OF SPECIAL ASCENDANTS.'Keeping the
planetsa t birtb as it is, preparev ariousBhava charts with respect
to eachspecial ascendanta nd analyse as done for the natal
ascendant.

Notes : This is a very important clue given by the sage'
We get the 'longitudes of the three special ascendantsv, iz'
Bhava Lagna, Hora Iagna and Ghatika Lagna' Apart from the
natal ascendant, the planets will remain in different bhavas
according to ttre special ascendantb eing considered' Thus we
get foui different Bhava charts. If a planet remains in the
iame bhava in all the four bhava charts,i t will speciallyr eveal
the bhavae ffects due to it. Otherwise, its effects are proprt-
ionatelya lteredi n respecto fthat bhava.

The Benarese dition( Chaukambhas eriesh) ast he following
special hints in this chapter respecting planets and bhavas,
t-hus: The planet on the cuspo f a housew ill give full effectsd ue
to the bhava concerned. The one in Bhava Sandhi (end of
house)g ivesn o resultsd ue to tbat bhava. (This doesnot roean
that the planet is wholly ineffective. It is, suffice to say,
ineffectivea s far as that bhavai s concerned')If a planeti s ahead
of the Bhavas phuta( longitude)of thevariousL agnas( i.e.N atal,
Bhava, Hora and GhatikaL agnasb) ut within I5", its effectsd ue
to the Bhava concerneds tart diminishing. Converselyi f it is
prior to the cuspb ut not beyondl 5o, the effectsp roportionately
increase. Needlesst o mcntion that on the 'cusp', the effcctsa re
more revealed. This gives us a clue that longitudea rrived iilf
the caseo f BhavaL agna,H ora Lagnaetca nd Ghatika lagna aref
thecenterp ointso f thoseL agnas,jusat s for the natalascendanlf

qofrercqE{ri $rTqi g'crqrqq ism: r
qet frarrqriq qeatgf,* sfi{ ut otl

rtt + GLc ,* u^t1,,t



Chapter5 65

. ulwvnn{frr"i *qrtiqtq qilrq I
(rlilrdst(f,Fli qtilkqwqa: ultrl
la{1ilfeal q?qqril?d qqiE gdt,r
atq qlrr-rnmi rrqfq€r ilil: tRI n t Rtl
qHq (qe*i sqrdtt si qR r
atq i<i qlq{,tc nqrit E fqqME nlltl
nq{fflfail: qrqlu} tifrr: ( g ade:r 

10-131.VARNADA DASA : I now derailV arnada Dasa
justby knowing which, one can dealwith the longevityof a
native. If the natal ascendanits  an odd sign count dirctly from
Aries to natal ascendant. If the natal ascendanits  an even sign,
count from Pisces to the natal ascendant, in the"ieverseo rder.
Similarly, if the Hora Lagna is an odd one, count from Aries to
Hora Iagna in direct order. If the Hota Iagna is an even one,
count from Piscest o Hora Lagna in the reverseorder. If both
the products are odd signso r even signs, then add both thq-
figures. Ifoneis odd and the otheris even, then knowthd
differenceb etweent he two products. If the latest product, in
this process,i s an odd one, count so many signsf rom Aries in
a direct manner; if an evenone, count so many signsf rom Pisces
in reverseo rder. The sign so known will be the Varnada for
the ascendant.
t-a-tes 

;Take the caseof a'native who hasL ibra (an odd
sign)a s natal ascendanta nd Scorpio (an even sign) as Hora*:,
Lagna. When we count from Aries to Libra (odd sign-hence
direct), we get ?. Again from Piscest o Scorpio (Hora lagna, an
evens ign-hence reverse)we have 5 signs.W e havet o add these
two figures,a s'theya re of the same class,i .e. odd. We get 12. l
This producti s an evenone. Hencewe have to count 12 signs
from Piscesi n a reversemannert o get Varanadaf or the I:gna.
Thus we get Aries. This is the Varnada Rasi for natal ascendant.

There is a suggestionf rom one quarter that longitudes
of natal ascendanat nd Hora Lagna be also taken into consid,
eration.I n that case,t he counting when done from Aries, is to
be donef rom zerod egree. And from Piscesi,t is from the last
degreeof Pisces,i. e. the 30th degree of Piscesis  the starting
point. J



66 Brihat ParasaraH ora Sastra

garrdwi qEt {T Fi faaiw: tt
{te<natfrr <e-dqfliil im ulvu
qqda* q4* qr{tq ffiidelrmlqr E I
{qqcfit*{ itrttr urc}c-5rwql trlttt

l+15. EFFECTS OF VARANADA.' Now listen to the
use of the above. Out of the two, viz. natal ascendanta nd Hora
Lagna, whicheveri s stronger, from there Varnada starts' If the
natal ascendanits  an old sign, the counting of Dasasi s clock'
wise. Otherwisea nti'clockwise. The Lagna dasay earsw ill equal
thc number of signs intervening between the natal ascendant
and Varnada, Similarly for other houses.

etq{fie: qlq*Tr} qltqs fatlq* t
qFe twr( afq iliTf{rq{?ii ttwt q-tq{ lltqu
€c{-tt ntnX{wrlfE fqsqqftr. 
at'{ qlf{rqrfq f"s}ui qrqiqt llt\ell
q!ffiq * fqr t qrreRq-dtE sql l
E!t{q qcaqq qrqq m'cngfrfffi(lllell
g|[,rEnctqarFr qfrqrq {{tqs: t
Td€E {q* Rur;rrqrrq{qrsa: lltell
ftqra fiq qrnsqid frfffat( I
{rqTrf{1q{nqt n rqcnqTqfu${ llQoll

'16-20. Should a trine from the ascendant'sV arnada be
occupiedo r aspectedb y a -malefict,h e native will tive only upto
the iasa oi ttt" said Rasi.- Justa s the Rudra planeti n Soola
Dasa is capableo f causing evils, the above mentioned planets
relatedt o varnada's trine be treated. The varnada l-agna be
considereda s natal ascendantw hile the ?th from Varnada will
denotet he longevity of the spouset'h e I lth longevityo f elder
brothersa nd sisiers, the 3rd longevityo f youngerbrothers and
sisters,t he 5th the longevity of soirs,t he 4th longevity of mother
and the 9th longevity of futt rt. The dasa of the soola Rasi will
inflict greaterevils.

Notes : Rudra planet is the one which has more strength
whent he lords of 2nd and 8th are considered. The planetw ith



Chapter 6 67

Rudra designation ormally featuresin  SoolaD asat o know the
possiblet ime of deatli. The Dasaso f the Rasisare calculated in
direct or reverseorder according to the natal ascendant being
odd or even.

Soola Dasa calculationsare akin to that of Sthira Dara.
But in the caseof Sthira Dasa, Rudri's counterpartis  Brahma
Graha. The two Dasasa re discusscdin  ch. 46 of the 2nd part
of our treatise,a mong various Dasas.

gr arqfEqr<ni qmiem qrt{r {m I
C q,Ff :irf tQat a qqrqq{ tRttl

rr{Tqrt iliEr *q TTntdi qrf{r qm I
griqrqifl qrf{rqfli fini{tri$i qtr rrRRrr
qqqt{wfa ir 5tqr *d wf liq r
Freqenqitr fq€sil{mqfr trRltt
€rlt{iq!fii irf?i qqinifqqhqi I
qwfr<tf{ililrti tri*s qqfinarn Rvtl

2I-24. Similar assessmentbs e made with refereFcet o the
Varnada of each Bhava commencing the first and the evils and
goods due to a nativity be known. t!g!g_-yt"t""d"
only for Bhavas( B.asi their

Dasawillbe one twelfth of the Dasaand the order will
alsob e clockwise or anti-clockwissa s explained earlier. The
natal ascendantis  to be calculateda ccordingt o birth place while
Bhaval agna, Hora Lagna etc. arE common to all places.

sTsrTft sqtqqte'qtlll: l Qtt
Chapter 6

The Sixteen DivisionsO f A Sign
taT r(tqrn6rt6e{T qrRr$ g* r
alafwqrfq qnlni riakaq s'qqr? t<lt lll



68 Erihat ParasaraHora Sastra

l. O sage,I  have known from you about the planets,s igns
and their descriptions. I desiret o know the detailsof various
divisions of a sign, which pleasen arrate.

qtth qtcn mq rgr qJsftilq(: I
ilit wrfnaqtfq iiq t {qilrfqfd nRtl
qii tttr ir iwugdn: Trcrqirt': r
iqt{il ilqirtrq qqk, q}s{rirtt: nQu
frtrtdl tcrr6'n} itnfsftrirrt€f,n:I 
qtctntsnilu: ctGatr'mFirrr : q({ nvtl

2-4. NAMES OE THE 16 VARGAS .' Lord Brahma has
described1 6 kinds of Vargas (Divisions) for each sign. Listen
to those. The samea re : Rasi, Hora, Drekkana, Chathurthamsa,
Sapthamamsa, Navamsa, Dssanoamsa,D vadasamsa,Shodas-
amsa,V insamsa, ChaturvimsamsaS, apthavimsamsaT,r imsamsa,
Khavcdamsa, Akshavedamsaa nd Shashtiamsa.

m*i rrs Qatq uifr qtrT iFFn:I 
- qiqlfrqt ilft f,n affitrn{ ttrtt

fqc<rwlFiin' tn: q{€-q-  +lFcctt: - '--
qrrkd i+at" ,if*A: t!il it 
ilurft ilei "rt 

ttwri q@d qt(trqtt

' 5.6. RASI AND HORA : The Rasi ownetl by a planet 
 ic
called its Kshetra (one sign). The first half of an old signr is the
Hora ruled by tbe Sun while the secondh alf is the Hora bf the
Moon. Th9 reversei g true in the caseof an evens ign. Half
of Rasi is called Hora. These are totally 24 counted from
Aries and repcat twice (at the rate of 12) in the whole of the
zodiac.

Notes t The nameso f planets lording over the 12 signs
bave becn given earlier. Thc following table throws light on
lordehipoof Horas (15" cach) of the 12 signs.



Chapter 6 59

Speculum Of Horas

Sign Hora lord Hora lord
(0;-l5e) (15-30')

Aries Sun Moon

Taurus Moon Sun

Gemini Sun Moon

Caicer Moon Sun

Leo Sun Moon

Virgo Moon Sun

Libra Sun Moon

Scorpio Moon Sun

Sagittarius Sun Moon

Capricorn Moon Sun

Aquarius Sun Moon

Pisces Moon Sun

<tfirfrwFlrilmron€ q q€r*fiKr: r
ryiled N iqri: swil qt{ rrsrr
rq{qiqqrqi q r{ffi lmrtrq il |
irc{r-sqfRr€3kr ic6To lnnrafts rrcrr

7-8. DECANATE : Oue third of a Rasi is called Drckkane
(decanate). These are totally 36, counted from Aries (to
Pisces),r epeating thric'fer oamt t he rate qf 12 per round. The lst,
5th and the 9th Rasis a sign a;- its tbree decanatcsa, nd
bre respectivelylo rded by Narada,A gasthyaan{ Door'vasa.

Notes : Each Rasi has three decanatesor Drekkanas. Thc
first one is ruled by the lord of the very sign. The second one



?0 Brihat Parasara Hora Satrd

belonge to the planet that rules the 5th from the sign in
question. The lord of the 9th from the sign in questioni s the
lord of the 3rd decanate. Each decanateis  l0 degreesin length.
The 3 decanatesalong with the signsi n which they fall are ag
per table given belaw :

SpeculumOf Decsnates
(Note : The signs in this and other tablesa re indicated by

numericalsc, .g. I is Aries, 2 is Taurus& C.)

Sign lst decsnate2 nd decanate3 rd decenate

Arips I 5 9
Taurus 2 6 l0
Gemini 3 7 l l
Cancer 4 E l2
Leo 5 9 I

Virgo 6 l0 2
Libra 7 '  l l 3
Scorpio 8 l2 4
Sagittarius 9 I 5
Capricorn l0 2 6
Aquarius l l 3 7
Pisces t2 4 8

fnafeg r
Tl?F6',rir rjtrirlir Sqt<{ir qqRFT: lltll

9. CHATURTHAMSA .' The lords of the 4 anglesf rom a
sign are the rulers of respectiveC haturthanrsao f a Rasi comme-
nJing from Aries. Each Chathurthamsias  one fourth of a Rasi.
The deities tespectively are Sanaka, Sananda, Kumara and
Sanatana'

Notes : Each Chaturthamsa is one fourth of a sign or
?'30'. The lst, 2nd, 3rd and 4th Chaturthamsasa re ruled
respectirelyb y the sames ign, the 4th, 7th and lOth signst here-
from. Seet he table given below :



Ahapter6 1l

Speculum Of Chaturthamss

Signs 45678 t0  l l t2

7" 30', r ' 2  3  4 ' 5  6  7  8  9  l 0  l t  12
15" 4  s  6  1  8  9  10 ' l l  12  |  2  3
22" 30', ' r  8  910  l | r z  l  2  3  4  5  6
300 10  1 l  t 2  t  2  3  4  5  6  7  8 '  9

Example :ThefourChatur tharsasofAr iesarerespec t i .
vetv ruiio dy Aries, Cancer,L ibra and Capricorn'

qcili{rqreta}c{Q qqra'fqr failna: t
qcffiertf{{rqq ul otl

{wRrqrl q {Hat:
qrt(*rlrl q Esqrszil ariq<eeuta: t
Ict{aqqrdli qr qaweftm: lll tll

l0-ll. SAPTHAMAMSA .' The Sapthamamsa(.o ne
seventho f a Rasi)c ounting commencesf rom the same srgn. ln
;;; ;; of an ooh sign. Itls from the sevenths ignt hereofw hile
;;-.6 signi s corisid-ercd.T he nameso f the sevend ivtstonst n

ti*t-ite : fshaaia'Ksheera,D adhi,. Ghritha, Ikshu^Rasa'
i"lAiiAa iivi su;alfi;]i. Thesed esignatioanrse r eversefdo r an
evens ign"". ii 

Niotes:  Each sign is made in ? equal.p arts of 4' 17' 8::1:
which is calledS aptatiamsa. As far as odd signsa re copell:l'
the Saptamamsaias ll in the successives i-ginn s commenclnglr om
iil; ;ab sign ln question. The counting the samem anneri s
i;;;ih;f,h tigtiir,"t"oi for an evens i'-n' Example:  For Aries'
iirili Jiiiii*i-""i" A-r-idiiu, llTttauuiiurut,sG  cminei tc.,w hilefo 1Tau11s
iffi; ;;;"'a;;'pi;; capricorne tc' seet he table
givenb elow :

SPeculumO f SaPthamamsls

Signs t 2 34 ) 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2

D
I lst Dvn I 8 3  lo  s  t2  7  2  e  |  \ \ ' 6
v 2nd Dvn 2 ;  41 \  6  I  8  3 lo  5 r?  7

ro i i i  i  z  e 4 l l  q  I  8
I 3rd Dvn 3
s 4th Dvn 4 i i6 '1sglo5r27?e
I 5th Dvn 5 i' i;lilrleo4srr2q7l2q2l rlor t
o 6th Dvn 6
N ?th Dvn 7 i ;  + I t  6  I  8  3to srz
s



12 . Brihat parasara Hora Sasna

iltffi ilrqrfrFd ilawq166t,
sql m{qqtlfift fffiri fqqeri: rr
ffi TaHTr{q{ qqftg ltg q utRtl

12. NI,YAMSA : The Navamsac alculationa re for a mova-
ble sign from there itself, for a fixed sign from the 9th thereof
Td foy-1dual sign from the 5th thereof. They go by designations
Dova (divine), Manushya (human)a nd Rakshasa( Cevifsnl in a
rucccssivea nd repetitive order for a movables ign. (Manushya,
Rgkshasaa nd Deva are the order for a fixed sign while Rakshasa
Manushyaa nd Deva are a dual sign'so rder.)

Noter : Navamsa is l/9th part of a sign or J. 20,. The
9 Navamsasi n order commenoef rom the same sign for a morable
eign, from the 9th for q fixed sign and from Sth for a dual sign
For cxample. ' the Navamsas of Aries are counted from Aries
rlself; from capricorn for Taurus and from Libra for Gemini.
fhese are fully rhown in the table below :

SpeculumO f Navamsas

S igns  l 2  3  4  S  6  7 I910  l t  t 2

D l s t  I  r c9 75  4  I l 074 t l 0 74
I2nd  2 t l t ; 5  2 l l  8  5  2 l r 85
V3 rd  312 9 6 3 t2  9  6  3 r2 96
I4 th  4 l 10 ,  7  4 l t 0  7  4  t 107
s5 rh  5  2 l l : ,E  5 2 r t  8  5  2 uI
I 6 rh  6 , t 2  r 9  6 3 t2  9  6  3 129
oT th  7  4 I  : 10  7 4 l l 0  7  4 l l 0
NS th  8  5 2 : l l  I s  2 l l  8  5 2r l
S 9 th  9  6 . t r2  9 6  3 t2  9  6 3t2

{rFrtmr ?qirdq $t ,a;rqqrd FrFrrl: 
tn gltftfurrm Far-sfirqq-<Gnmt:t  l itl
!e!i| Tnil*q glinrr-rerrwr: r
qrflTil rqdil at |n agafur q iltvll



ChapQr6  fi
13-14. DASAMSA : Starting from the same sign for an

odd sign and from the 9th with referencet o an evens ign, the l0
Dasamsase ach of 3o are reckoned. Thesea re preside?o ver.by
the ten rulers of the cardinal directonsy iz. Indra, agni, yama,
Rakshasa"V aruna, Vayu, Kubera, Isana, Brahmaa nd Ana' ntha
in caseo f an odd sign. It is in the reverse order these

that 
presidingd eities ore reckonedw hen an evensign is given.

Notes : In the case of an odd sign, the Dasamamsas
(3'each) are suc'cessivelyc ciunted from ihe same sign. Th;
gounting is from the 9th in caseof an evens ign. Secihe table
below :

SpeculunO f Desrnsr

Signs 23456789101112

ls t 110  3 1252 7  49  6 1 l  8
D 2nd 2 l t  4 163 8  510  7 129
I 3rd 3 t2  5 214 9 6 il I l l 0
v 4th 416 385 107 t29 2 t l
I 5th s27 496 l l  8  I  l 0 3 t2
s 6th 638 510  7 1292 l l 4 l
I 7rh 74  9 6 l l  8 l l 03 t2 52
o 8th 8510 712  9 2 r t  4  t 63
N 9th 96 l r 8 l l 0 3 t2  5  2 74
s loth 10712 9  2 l l 4163 85

Example : For odd sings,t he Dasamsasa re the l0 signs
counted successivelyt herefrom. For even eigns, these fall in
l0 sirccessivesi gqsc ounted from the 9th thereof.

enEvinrq Ttir
*qrq*rtt: lFq{fr

15. DYADASAMSA.. Tbe reckoning of the Dvadasamsa
(one twelfth of a sign or 2[ degreeoe ach) comnences( rom the
samesign. In each sign the presidcntship rcpeatst briie in thc
order of Ganesa, Aswini Kumara, yama and Sarpaf or the 12
Dvadasamsas.



14 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastata

Notes : Each Dvadasamsias  2" 30' and the 12 divisions
fall successiveilny the successivle2  signsf rom the signi n quest-
ion. The following table will showt he details.

SpeculumO f Dvadasamsa

Signs 23456 89 l0 l l t 2

r - . i 2 ?
J + J (t 'l 8 9 l0 ll 12.

2nd 23 4  5 ' 6 7  8  9  t 0  l l  t 2 .  I
D 3rd 3 '4 567 8  9 l0n l z l  2
I 4th 45 678 9 l0 l l 12 r23
V sth 56 189 l0 l l 12 l234
I 6th 67 8  910 l l  t 2  |  2  3  4  s
s 7rh 78 g r l o  l l 12 r23456
I 8th 89 lo  l l  12 1234567
O 9th 910 l l  12  I 2  3  4  5  6 ' 7 I
N l0rh l 0  l l t 2 t 2 3456789
s  l l t h n12 | 2 3 4  5  6  7  8 .  9  l 0

l2th t2  I 234 s6789 l0 l l

Example:  The Dvadasamsains Arics in order are : Aries,
Taurus,G emini, Cancer, Leo Vir'o, Libra, Scorpio,Sagittar-
i'.:;, Cal,rrcorn,A quariusa nd Pisces' Similarly, for other signs
theseb e known from the Table.

erc-fttqrsRaditq r qls{ti{Tnqrrfsgr 
sTq-fE6QT( : WrT glt gA sdtqq u t !,u I

16. SHODASAIUISA: Startingf rom Aries for a movable
sign,f rom Leo for a fixcd signa nd from Sagittariusfo r a dual
sign,t he l6 Shoclasams(al6st h parto f a sigrri. e.of l '52' 30") are
regularlyd istributcd.T he prcsidingd eitieso f theser epeaitn  the
order Brahma,V ishnu,S ivaand Sunf our timesi n the caseof an
odd sign. It is revcrsein  the caseo f an even signt hat these
ruling deitiesa reu nderstood.

Notes : Eachsign is made into 16 equal partso f Shodas-
amsas of l" 52' 30". Thc 16divisionsf or any movable sign



Chapter6 15
commencef rom Aries anda red istributeds uccessivelyS.i milarly
from Leo for all fixed signs and from Sagittarius for all dual
signs. Seet he tableg ivenb elow:

Speculum 
_ of bhodasansas( or Kalamsas)

A-ries,C ancer Taurus' ,t eo Gemini,
Signs Libra & Capri Scorp & Virgo, Sa-gi& 

Aquarius Pisces 

Ist/t 3th Aries Leo Sagittarius
'Taurus

2ndll4th Virgo Capri

3rd/l5th Gemini Libra Aqua

D 4thl l6th. Cancer Scorp Pisces
I
v 5th Leo Sagi Aries
I
S 6th Virgo Capri Taurus
I
o 7th Libra Aqua Gemini
N
s 8th Scorp Pisces Cancer

9th Sagi Aries Leo

l0th Capri Taurus Virgo
I l th .Aqua Gemini Libra
l2th Pisces Cancer Scorpio

Example : The 16 Shodasamsafso r Aries or Cancer,o r
Libra or Capricorn( movables igr.sa) red istributedto  the l6 signs
(12+4) commencingfr om Aries. Similarlyf or fixed signsf ron
Lco and for dual signsf rom Sagittariusa s shown in the above
Speculum,

qq ffiqTqrfiqfqql rErvilfqin:I 
fwrtqi frqi atqq granq Graqnt utetl



76 Brihat Parasara Eora Sastta

srdl rlt qqr qe{tfqqqrf qrf,r edt r
tnt aElrcnltft€ ar qfqar cqilgafr1lqtl
ffqf$:'{r rTdt ttff qqrtr ?rq!nE rinI 
frga ggdt i'R fqqt qftfuilnq ut Q.rr
sqqnl aqr tur fwrrilqt ftnrfidl r
qqrliit rt qrilSl Tril qr-saqFlefi llRotl
ffir sisrtT el<r m(t i6!r{t fqar r
nftfr €r{t Er qsin qnafvrr uRttl

17-21. ViMSAMSA .. From Aries for a movable sign,
from Sagittariusf or a fixed sign and from Leo for a common
eign-this is how the calculationso f Vimsamsa ( l/20th of a
lign or 1"30' each)a re to commenceT" he presidingd eitiesof thc
20 Vimsamsasi n an -odd sign are respectivetyi  Xaati (r,,r*),
Gauri, Jaya (qrr), Lakshmi, Vijaya, Vimata, Sati, Tara, Jvati-
Mukhi, Sveta,L elita, Bagala-mukhi,p ratyangira,S achi,Raudri,
Bhavani, Varada,J aya (qqT), Tripura and Sumukhi. In an even
1gn th.ese2 0 deities reipeciively are : Daya, Megha, Chinnasi,
Pisachini,D hoomavathi, Matangi, Bala, B-hadra,l run", Anala,
Pingala, Chuchchuka, Ghora, Vaarahi, Vaishnavi,Sita (ftiilr).
B huvanesvari,B hairavi, Mangalaa nd Aparajita.

Notes : There are 20 Vimsam sas at the rate of 1"30' .
degreesi n the whole of a sign. Seet he speculumo f Vimsamsas
given below :

Specrlomo f Ylnsemsrs

Sigor Aries, Cancer, TaurusL, co Gemini,
Libra & Scorp& Aqua Vlrgo,S a1,i
Capri & Pisccs

D Istll3th Arics Sagi Leo
I
v 2ndll4th Taurus C-apri Virgo
sI 3rd/l5th Gcmini Aqua Libra
I
o 4thll6th Canccr Fispes Soorp
Ns sth/l7th Lco Aricr Sagi



Chopter 6 77
. 6rhl18th Virgo Taurus Capri

Ttbil 9th Libra Gemini Aqua

8th/20th Scorp Cancer Pisces

9th Sagi Leo Aries

loth Capri Virgo Taurus

l l th Aqua Libra Gemini

l2th Pisces Scorp Cancer

EXAMPLE : For Aries and other movable signs,t he
20 divisionsa re in order distributed from Aries; for fixed signs
from Sagittarius and for dual signsf rom Leo as could be seen
from the Table.

fraffiqqt: Fr6ntcui Q r
f,dqtTf,fi 8l F6ftt: n{u*sw: lRRtl
fq{ftqt wq} ffi qtrsrnqqrlTafi: I
nlfqerl q{d} {tq: ftr{r<} ffi qqrn 11
trslql {rqt rftdTfadti frkoanq nRttl

22-23.S IDDHAMSA; The Siddhamsa( ll24th part of a
sign br I'15' each)d istribution commencesfr om Leo and Cancer
respectivelyf or.an odd signand an even sign. In the caseo fan
odd sign the ruling deities repeat twice in the order of Skanda,
ParsudharaA, nala, Viswakarma, Bhaga,M itra, Maya, Antaka,
Vrisha-dhwaja, Govinda, Madana and Bhima. Reverse these
from Bhishma (to Skanda)t wice to know the deities for rhe
Siddhamsain  an even aign.

Notes : Siddhamsai s also called Chaturvimsamsa,e ach
being of a length of l"l5', (24 in number in the whole of a sign).
Tlie succesively distributed Siddhdmsasc ommence from Leo
for any odd sign and from Cancerf or any evensip, as per the
Table :



7E Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

Speculumof Siddhemss

Signs odd Even

lst/13th I.so Cancer
2ndil 4th Virgo Leo
3rd/l5th Libra Virgo

n

r 4thlt6th Scorp Libra
y sth/lzth Sagi Scorp

I etn/ratn Capri Sagi

$ Tthlrsth Aqua Capri
s gtn/zotn Pisces Aqua

9th/21'st Aries Pisces
l0thl22nd Taurus Aries

. l l th/23rd Gemini Taurus
. l2thl24th Cancer Gemini

qirfifirqr: qr{r*TqqqfAfriTTTTEIT: 
wirrfa{isft{iltfqatl qrr{kar: nRytl

fq{"q{6fnMfq?€} egls,qq: ilR{tl
a*scq6q6r-. Rqr iq sfrlfircr:r 
ariwra qiqim iwrfeqqqrqtq nRqtl

24.26. BTIAMSA (NAKSHATRAMSA OR SAPTAVIMS.
AMSA).' The Bhamsal ords are respectiveltyh e presidingd eities
ef the 27 Nakshatrasa s under : Dastra( Aswini Kumara),y ama,



Chapter 6 79

Agni, Brahma, Chandra, Isa, Aditi, Jrva, Ahi, Pitara, Bhaga,
Aryama,S urya,T vashta,Marut, Sakragni,Mitra, VasavaR, aks-
hasa,Varuna,V isvadevaG, ovinda,Vasu,V aruna,A japa, Ahirb-
udhanyaa nd Pusha. Theseare for an odd sign. Count these
deitiesi n a reverseo rder for an even sign. The Bhamsadistri
bution commenc€sfr om Aries and other movable signs for all
the 12 signs.

Notes : One Bhamsai s of l" 6' 40" of arc and there are
27 suchd ivisionsi n a sign. Seet he speculumg ivenb elow :

Speculun Of Bhamsa

Signs |  2  3  5  
. 4 . 6  7  8  9  l 0  l l  1 2

 

lst/l3th/25th I 4 7  t 0  t . 4 7 to  I 4  710
D 2ndll4thl26th 2 5 8  l l  2  5 8 l r  2 5  8  l l
I 3rdil5thl27th3 '6 9 r2  3  6 912  3 6  9 t2
v 4th/l6th 4 7 t0  |  47 l0  t 4 7 t0  r
I sth/l7th 5 8 l l  2  5  8 n25 8 l l  2
s 6th/r8th 6 9 12  J  6  9 1236 9 t2  3
I Tthlrgth 7 t0 |  4  7 tO t  47 10  14
o 8thi20th 8 11 2  5  8  l l 2 s8 l l .  2  5
N 9thl2lst 9 12 3 ,6  g t2 36 .9 r236
S l0th/22nd l0 . I 4  7 r0  I 4  710 r47

lltbl23rd I I 2 3  811  2 5  8 i l 258
lzthl24th t2 3 6  912  3 6  9 t2 369

The Bhamsas(o r Nakshatramsaso r Sapthavimsamsaasr)e 
distributedf rom Aries for fiery signs,f rom Cancerf or earthy
signs,f rom Libra for airy signsa nd Capricornf or waterys igns.
I haveon P. 3l of my English.translatioonf  SARAVALI given
ilifferent calculation for Nakshatramsa.' That sourceobviously
is defectiveand I would prefer Parasara'sv ersion as given in our
present ext.

fewi*inq Rqt gnrfivaawriqrr: 
,iqqqrseqrilHqFnil q?qqrE q* ttR\ett



80 Brihat ParasuraHora Sastra

qf6, crit<rrd q qi-A EfFTi{GTqIT 
fqqlq rwtrsiw: (qrnil fqq{qrquRcrl

27-28. TRIMSAMSA : The Trimsamsa lords for an odd
signa re.Mars,S aturn, Jupiter, Mercury and Venus. Each of
them in order rules 5,5,8,7a nd 5 degreesT, he deitiesr uling over
the Trimsamsasare respectively, Agni, Vayu, Indra, Kubera,
and Varuna. In the case of an even sign, the quantum of
Trimsamsa,p lanetaryl ordship and deitidsg et reversed.

Notes : For Trimsamsad ivisions,s eet he tableg ivenb elow :

Speculumo f Trimsamsas

Signs 1,3,5,7,9 Signs 2,4,6,8,1a0n d
and 1l t2

D First 5" Aries First 5" Taurus
I
v Next 5" Aquarius Next 7o Virgo
I
S Next 8o Sagittarius Next 8o Pisces
I
o Next 7' Gemini Next 5o Capricorn
N
s Next 5' Libra Next 5" Scorpio

qiqrfrq|faqlqnTqfuql fqqt fmq I
wi ERil] iqr: qq€{rluqm{GEmn: iQ.tl
fqcurT-fi] qtlfqw iq6arurf,r fqnl{q: I
qfr qawr rFqii: 6lql qwt g?r?  ul ot l

29-30. CHATI/ARIMSAMSA ( I l40th part of a sign) .. For
odd signscount from Aries and for an evensign from Libra in
respecot f Chatvarimsamsa(se acho f 45' of arc). Vishnu,C han-
dra, Marichi, Tvashta,D hata, Siva,Ravi, Yama,Y aksha,G and-
harva,Kala and Varuna repeat successivelays  presidingd eities
in the sameo rder for all sings.

Notes : Chatvarimsamsao r Khavedamsais  a fortieth part
of a signor 45' of arc. Thesea re successiveldyi stributedi nthe
varioussignsf rom Aries in caseo f any odd sign, and from Libra
in caseof any even sign. Seet he table noted below ..



Chapter 6 8 l

Spcculumo f Chatvrriqsamsa

r  2  3  4  5  6  7  I  9 l 0 l l 12

lst, 13th,2 5th,37tb I 7  17  r7 l 7  r 7  17
D 2nd, I4th,26th,38th 2 82E28282828
I 3rd, I 5th, 27th,3 9th 3 9  3  9  3  9  3  g  3  9  3  . 9
v 4th, l6th,28th,40th 4 l 0  410  410  410  410  410
I  5th, 17th,29th 5 l l  5  l 1  5  l l  5  l l  5  i l  5  l l
s 6th, l8th,30th 6 12  6 r2  612  612  612  612
|  7 th , l9 th ,31s t  7 t 7  t 7 l 7 l 717 l
O 8th, 20th,32nd 8 28282828282
N 9th,2 lst ,  33rd 9 3  9 ' 3  9  3  9  3  9  3  9  3
S 10th,22nd,34th l0 410  410  410  410  410  4

l l th ,23rd ,  35 th  l l 5  l l  5  i l  s  1 l  5  l l  5  l l  5
l 2 th ,24 th ,36 th  l2 612  6 t2  612  612  612  6

As regardsr uling deitiesVishnut o Varunar epeat3 times
while in the 4th round the rulershipi s only upto Tvashta.

ileilH+€$TmrflqfrrqT{q{i rrqr( r
ftui ftrq!1 fa*arnq fqul{rfqturq{ilt lll t ll
fqrr;trgwi66r t<qhvrr: fcqt Gi r
lqr: ,ia-<nqtarf qiqr faqrflq ! rr11rr

3l-32. AKSHA VEDAMSA (Il4sth part of a sisn) :
Aries,L eo and Sagittariusa re the signs from which the distri-
butions respectivelyc ommence lbr movable,i mmovablea :d
commons igns. In movable signs,B rahma, Sivaand Vishnu;
in immovables ings Siva, Vishnua nd Brahmaand in common
singsV ishnu, Brahma and Siva repeat15 times the president-
ship over theseA kshavedamsas.

Notes : Each Akshavedamsais  of 40' arc as a sign is
dividedi nto 45 equal'parts. Ariesi s the startingp oint for all
movables igns,L eo for all fixeds ignsa nd Sagittariusfor all dual
signs. The distribution is throughi n successives igns in each
case. Seet he Tableg iveno n the ncxt page :



82 Brihat parasaral {ora Sastrs
Specutumo f Akshsvealamsa

|  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 t 0 t t 1 2

ls t ,  l3 th ,25 th ,37 thI 5  9  I  5  9  I  5  g .  I  
' 2 n d , l 4 t h , 2 6 t h , 3 8 t h 2  5 9

6 t 0  2  6 1 0  2  6 l O  2  6 l 0
D 3 r d ,  l 5 t h , 2 7 t h , 3 9 t h 3  7 t l  3  7 t l  3  i f i  ' 3  

7 l l
I  4 t h , l 6 t h , 2 g t h , 4 0 t h 4  g t 2  4  g 1 2  4  g t 2  4  g t 2
V s t h ,  l 7 t h , 2 9 t h , 4 l s t5  9 l  5  9  |  5  9  I  5  g I
I  6 t h , l 8 t h , 3 0 t h , 4 2 n d 6 t 02  6 t O  2  6 I O  2  6 t O 2
S  7 t h , l 9 t h , 3 l s t , 4 3 r d7  t t  3  7  t t  3  7  l l  3  7  t l 3
I 8 t h , 2 0 t h , 3 2 n d , 4 4 t h B t 2  4  8 t 2  4  8 1 2  4  g t 2 4
O 9 t h , 2 l s t , 3 3 r d , 4 5 t h9  I  5  9  I  S  g  t  5  g  I 5
N to rh ,2 2nd,34 th  t0  2 '  6  l0  2  6  l0  2  6  lo  2 6
S  l l t h , 2 3 r d , 3 5 t h  l l  3  7 t t  3  7 t l  3  7 t l  g 7

l 2 t h , 2 4 t h , 3 6 t h  t 2  4  8 t 2  4  8 1 2  4  9 1 2  4 8

Sn: ftr6TqS l* fauarivrrtrqdqr q 
rid *d q irrni$ql: sclltr'{TqTr:q iri uI lll
q'lrlrq rerrr} lq: git q*-f*-d,
qr6E:g FrEqlt t(al qfdqt{r gtter: trlytl
qqrrqlilfreEqii{irqi€ r[rFT: Wfligw: r
T3: dra-[t-t-*g-Rau-rtrrtr, ||  Q{ rr 
+qral' nfrrmrq fHtqr-fi.qaTs-fl| 
gfsnl q?t{rq{q qnfr{st{iafi.: ||  I qr I 

{,0e5,gqrstill gotfavnn'<t : 
fev<rag-erma ggq) {nenqT"qrn l\etl
s'drriT{'rF|R}rqTa[n$: }qi|: d}amfiru: r
TTlFlagq;rrrqt q{tq[: fi'IFmrF,: nQctl
rrqfirfc; sfrq: Trlsffitnelsrrf,:r 
qdftrgqqrqql q q?Eier F{{,qqr:u letl
qt ri aqiqqra-iqrq: ca'ivn: xrifam, r
ecaq'yrcqfqT*qlt altnReqlqq:( t rrvorr



Chapter 6 83

{rrlqGEd{riq{ilr TET: qqwqqf: I
9 S

' {{q6eq'vnfqsil Er{Erfiif amfrq: 
6 9 ilvtrl

' . 33-41. SHASHTIAMSA (ll60th part a of sign or half-a-
degreee ach):  To calculatet he Shashtiamslao rd, ignoret he iign
positiono f a planeta nd take the degreese tc. it traversedi n that
sign.M ultiply that figureb y 2 and dividet he degreebsy  12.Add
I to the remainder which will indicate the sign in which the
Shashtiamsfa lls. The lord of that sign is the planetr uling the
said Shashtiamsa.I n odd signs,t he nameso f Shashtiamsasre  :
l. Ghora, 2. Rakshasa, 3. Deva, 4. Kubera, 5. Yaksha,
6. Kinnara, 7. Bhrashta, 8. Kulaghna, 9. Garala, 10. Vahni,
ll. Maya, 12. Purishaka, 13. Apampathi, 14. Marutwan,
15. Kala, 16. Sarpa, 17. Amrita 18. Indu, I9. Mridu,
20. Kornala,2 1. Heramba,22.Brahma2, 3. Vishnu,2 4. Mahes-
wara, 25. Deva, 26. Ardrc, 27. Kalinasa, 28. Kshiteesa,
29. Kamalakara, 30. Gulika, 31. Mrithyu, 32. Kaala,
33. Davagni, 34. Ghora, 35. Yama, 36 Kantaka, 37. Sudha,
38. Amrita, 39. Poornachandra4, 0. Vishadagdha4, 1,Kulanasa,
42. Vamsakshaya, 43. Utpata, q+. Kaala, 45. Saumya,
46. Komala, 47. Seetala, 48. Karala Damshtra 49. Chandra-
mukhi, 50. Praveena, 51. Kalapavaka, 52. Dandayudha,

' 53.N irmala.54.S aumya,55K. roora, 56. Atiseetala,5TA. mrita
58. Payodhi, 59. Bhramana,6 0. Chandrarekha(I ndurekha).T he
reverseis  the order for evens igns insomucha s thesen amesare
concerned. Planetsi n beneficS hashtiamsapsr oducea uspicious
resultsw hile the opposite is true in caseof planets in malefic
Shashtiamsas.

Notes : The method of calculating the ruling planet for
each Shashtiams(ao r 1/60th pat of asign or 30'of arc) is
advisedi n sloka 33 above. Assume that Venusi s placed in
Capricorn 13"25', To find out the Shashtiamslao rd, ignorc the
signp ositionand multiply the degreesa nd minutesby 2. Hence
13" 25' x2:26" 50'. The degreesi. e. 26 (ignoring minutes)b e
divided by 12. The remainderi s 2 which should be increase,:l
by l. Thus we get 3. Count 3 signsf rom Capricorn. The
resulting Shashtiamsapositioni 'These  s Piscesw hosel ord is Jupiter.

positionsc an also be markedi n a zodiac,adl iagram for
the planetsa nd ascendanfto r an easyg rasp.

The order of Shashtiapgs along with the meaningsof



84 Brihat ParasaraH ora Sastra

their designationga rc denoted below. Thesew ill be very help'
ful in delincationa ud to know whethera particular Shashtiamsa
is bcnehco r malefic in nature, (as marked against each Shash'
tiamsa).

Odrl sl3r Even sign

O'-0' 30 l. Ghore(M)-aweful, violent. 29" 30'-30"
0o30'-1" 2. Rehshrsa( M)-demoniacal. 29"'29"30'
l%l'30' 3. Devr (B)-divine' spirituals ide. 28"30'-29'
l'30'-2" 4. Kubera( B)-celestial treasurer. 28%28'30'
2"-2"90' 5. Yskshr (B)-celestial singer. 27"30"28"
2o3O-3' 6. Kinnarr (B)-a mythical being 27''27' 30'

with a human head in the form
of a horse,a bad or deformed man.

3o-3o30' ?. Bhreshtg( M)-fallen, vicious. 26'30'27"
3o30'-4' 8. Kulrghna (M)-ruining a family. 26"'26'30'
4"-4"30' 9. Gtnh (M)-poison or venom. 25"30''26"
4'30'-5' 10. Vdmt (M)-fire, gastricf luid, 25"'25"30'

digestivef aculty, appetitc.
5o-5o30' ll. Mey.r (MFdeceit, jugglery. 24"30"25"
5o30-6" 12. Purishake( M)-dirt. 24''24"30'
6'-6o30' 13. Apampathl( B)-the ocean, 23"30"24"

Varuna, (the rain god).
' 

6'30'-?o 14. Marut (B)-the wind gqd. 23'23'30'
7o-7o30' 15.K uls (M)-dark blue colour, 22'30"23"

weather,T ime considereda s one
ofthe nine dravYasb Y the
Vaiseshikasa,  Personw ho
distilsa nd sellsl iquor, Saturn,
Siva, a personificationo f the

' destructiveP rinciPle.
?'30;-8: 16. Sarpa( M)-snake. 22'-22'30',
8o-8o30' l!. Amrlta (B)-immortal, nectar. 21"30'-22"
8o30'-9o 18. Indu (BFMoon, thenumber l, 2l''21'30'

camphor.
9o-9o30' 19.M ridu(B)-moderate,s oft. 20'30',-2t'



85
Chapierd 

9'30110' 20. Komala (B)-tender, agreeablc' 20"-20o30'

10%10'30' 21. Heramba( B)-Ganesa, (the elep' 19"30120'
hant faced god), a boestful hero'
buffalo'

I 0'30'-l I o 22. Brahme (BFthe Uniu-"Tul Father' 19"-19'30'
a rnissile,s acredk nowledge'

ll"-11.30, 23. Vishnu(B)-the second deity of 18"30'-19"
the sacred Triad' name of Agni'
name of a lawgiver (author of
Vishnusmriti), a Pious man'

ll'30112o 24. Maheswara(B)-the third deity ' 
 18"-18'30'

of the Triad entrusted wlth the
task of Great Destruction' also
name of Vishnu, a'great lord
(sovereign)'

12"-12"30' 25. Deva (B)-same as S' No' 3 17"30'-18"

12"30'-13' 26. Ardra (B)-moist 17'-17"30',
l3'-13'30' 27. f,alinasr (BFdestruction of 16"30'-17"

strife (according to some' this
is a malefic Shashtiamsa)

13o30'-14'2 8' Kshiteesa(B )-ruler of the earth 16o-16o30'
ic'-f +":o' 29. Komatalaia (B)-a lake full of 15'30'-16'

. lotuses,a n assemblagoef  lotuses

14o30,-lS"3 0. Gulika (M)-Saturn's son. l5'-15"30'

15 ' -15"30 '3 l .Mr i thyu(M)-sonofMars 'death '14 '30a15"
15o30,-16"3 2. Kaala (M)-same asS .No. 15 14'-14'30'

16"-16"30' 33. Davagani( M)-a forestc onf,a- 13"30'-l4o
gration'

16'30'-l?' 34. Ghora( M)-same as S'No' I 13"-13"30'

l7o-L7"30' 35. Yama (M)-death personifred 12"30'-13"

1?'30118o 36. Kantrka (M)-thorn, any trouble' l2'-12"W
gome fellow to the state and
€nemy of order and governmeot'

18'-18'30' 37. Sudhr( B)-nectar, ambrosian, amc 11"30'-l2o
of the Ganges.

18'30'-19" 38. Amrita (B)-same as S'l'Io. 1? llo-llo30'
19'-19'30' 39. Poornaclendra( B)-Full Moon. t0'30111"



86 Brihat parasaraH ora Sastra
19o30"20' 40. Visladagdba(M )-destroyed by 10._10.30,

venom,c onsurn€db y grief.
20"-20'30' 41. Kulanasa( M)_same as g. 9"30,_10.
20'30'-21' 42. Vamsahshay(aM )-descent not 9"-9o30,

growingf urther.
2l'-21"30' 43.Utpata (M)-a portentous or 8"30',-9"

unusual phenomenon-  boding
calamity, any public calamity
like an eclipsee, arthquake&  C.

21"30'-22"4 4Kaala (M)-same as No. 15 8'-g'30'
22"-22"304' 5,. Saumya( B)-rctating or sacrcdt o 7'30',-go

the Moon, handsomea, uspicious.
22e30'.-234.6. Komala( B)-same as 20 7"-7'30'
23"-23"30'4. 7. Seelala( B)-cold, Moon, camphor, 6"30',-7.

turpentine,s andal.
2330'-24" 48.Krralodamshtra(M)-frightful 6%6.30,

teethed
24"'-24"30'4 9. Chandrenukb(i B)-having rhe 5"30',-6"

beautyo f the Moon.
24'30'-25o5 0. Pravecna(B )-clever, veried in. 5.-5.30,
25'-25'30' 51. Krla.Pavakr (M)-the destructive 4"30,-5.

fire at thee ndo f the world.
25'30'-26' 52. Dendayudha(M)-the staff hetd by 4._4"30,

an ascetic( or by a Brahmin).
26"-26'30' 53. Nirmela(B)-resplendent,s inless. 3"30,_4.

stainlessv, irtuous.
26"30'-27" 54. Saumyr( B)-same as S.No. 45 3.-3"30,
27"-27'30' 55. Kroon (M)-pitiless, mischievous, 2"30,-3"

bloody,d isagreeablete, rrible.
27"30'-28" 56. Atiseetde (B)-very cold. 2o-2"30,
28"-28"305' 7. Amritr (B)-same as S.No. lZ 1"30,_2.
2g'30'-29'58.P ayodhi( B)-Ocean. l"-1o30,
29"-29"'J0'5QB. hramana( M)-wandering. 0"30,-lo
29"30'-30' 60. Chandra Rekhe(B)-ttre digit or 0"-0"J0,

streako f the Moon.
. With the above interpretationo f the nam$ of the Shasht-



Clrapter 6 87

iamsasw, e will be wellguidedi n the matter of predictions. For
example,i f a beneficp laneti : in the 3rd housei denticalwith a
benefic'sR asi in 'Yaksha's hashtiamsath, e nativew ill have high
musicala chievements.I f Jupitero r the 2nd lord be in 'Kubera'

Shashtiamsao,n e will be very affluent. If a planeti n the 8th is
in 'Payodhi's hashtiamsafe, ar from water may be expected. If
the lOth lord occupies'B hrashta' shashtiamsath, e nativewill be
wretchedi n profession. In this manner, many incidcntsc an be
clearly cstiniated rvhich may not be 'visible't o ordinarye ye
from thc'h oroscoPe.

Now, we haveb eforeu s the detailso f all the l6 divisions
as deait with by sageP arasara.o ne more minute division,t he
minutestin  Hindu Astrology,i s Nadi Amsao r l50th part of a
sign rvhichw ill complcte tbe systemo f Divisionalisation. For
details,p lcases eem y rvorks" Doctrineso f suka Nadi - Retold"
and "An Epitomeo f Nadi Granthas".

aririan6 qet iiq t id fqulq l
qeqqt: qcf,qrtt{it farqrft !r{rior: llYRlt

Fqta q{dq}i qsqd ftvr6'r€q:t 
aT$qt tt'qm<tqt a fTt\r6{5qdg€q* llYlll

aEf,rrran<rcri q qi qqfrriq q 1
r[{fr: SqeF[qJTqq: r?ggEKTai qfq: llYvll
qcftrdsq Rtqd qrf(qm"f aiili6't: I
qrfrqTd n*larvargnd fefrraiqt llv{11
qfrrnTgrrcd FqI"Ei: fqarq{ a{r I
rn{IE(d c}( ee.fviao}d it €cdfq:l lvtrll
agfwiqclwred qirfu: qrft?frE?{| 
Rfiq: cftuTqqlq: elrcqt q'fc{qi+ uYerl
*ad awiqa$qi fefrr: etr( g{pPq{1 |
aqfrratnge{ sq 'iqfq; 5;5ffi2t{ llvcll
*wrcri u?q eqfx: H.af$tf:i eq{H6'{ |
qaefrrqq"{Tqi Eqfs{: gutwamqllvell



8E Brihat Parasara lloro Sastra

ftFqa"i:ry{r ;TFr qiEieT,TR{Aar 
qfifi'ti qt qfifili: rrnfa$Tra{:r{n t(otl
rifr{rfiFi n*rrTqhi firfq{q{tq r
qi, dtqeqrrrei rqraql iie6mr nr(ttl

{I$n: I
T{Tcilrq *;rflltii nrrf tqn: gdfaar iltRu
qldrrr r6fcar {twn geiarwt  r
rwr;fifrq?n*$q SFI?;TTf rrfrmm: utRll

42-53. yARGA CLASSIFICATION .. Maitreya, explained
now are thc sum effccts of classificationso f different divisions
(or Varps so far narrated). Thesc are four kinds,viz. Shad
Varga( 6 divisionsc onsidered)S, apthaY arga( 7 divisionsc onsid-
ered),D asa Varga( 10 divisionsc onsidereda) nd Shodasay arga
(all the l6 divisionsconsidercd).I n the Shadvargacl assification,
the Varga designations arc Kimsuka, Vyanjana, Chaamara,
Chatra and Kundala according to a planet being in 2 to 6
combinationso f good Vargas. Next is the Sapta vargai n which
these classificationsc ontinue in the same rnanner upto six
combinationso f good Vargas,t he 7th additional Vargag etting
classifieda s Mukutir- In the DasaV argaschemet,h e designations
commencef rom Parijata etc. such as 2 gooti Vargas-parijatha.
3. Uttama,4 . Gopura, 5. Simhasana6, . paaravata7, . Devaloka,
8. Brahmaloka, 9. Sakravahanaa nd 10. Vargas-Srirlhama.
In the Shodasa Varga schemet he combinationso f Vargas
go with designations thus : two good Vargas-Bhedaka,
3. Kusuma,4. Nagapushpa5, . Kanduka, 6. Kerala,7 . Kalpa-
vriksha,E.C handanaYana,9. Poornachandra1,0 .U chchaisrava,
ll. Dhanvantari, 12. Suryakanta, 13. Vidrtrma, 14. Sakra-
simhasana1, 5. Goloka and 16. Vargas-Sri Vallabha. In these
divisions,t he divisions falling in the planet's exaltatione ign,
Moolatrikonas ign,own sign, and the signs ownbd by the loid
of an angle from the Arudha ascendanta re all to be consictered
(as good Vargas). The divisions of a combustplanet, defeated
pllryt, weak planet and a planet in bad Avasthasl ike Sayanab e
all ignored to be auspicious,f or thesed estroy the good yogur.

Notes : Four kinds of summaryo f the Vargaso r diyisions
are suggestedth us :



Chapter 6 Ro

(a) Shadvarga (considering six Vargas) vi;. Rasi, Hora,
DecanateN, avarnsaDvadasamsan d Trimsamsa.

(b) SnptaVarga( sovenV argas)a ddir;i: Saptamamstao  the
ShadV arga.

(c) DasaV arga (ten Vargas) addingS hodasamsaD,a sama-
msaand Shashtiamsdai visionst o the SaptaV arga.

(d) ShodasaV arga (all the 16 Vargass o far narratedb y
the s.rge).

The groupsa s aboveare as per slokas1 7.20o f ch,7 infra.
The Vargast o be considered(a sg ood)a re :
l. Exaltationd ivisions.

' 2. Moolatrikona divisions.
3. Own divisions.
4. The divisionsof the ownerso f the four anglesc ounted

from the Arudha Padao r PadaL agna.
The first threea re clear. The fourth one needsa  clarifica-

tion. f n stoka 52 above,t he word ,,€{l{alq" (Sx'anullnrh) has
beenu scclw hich meansf rom the Arudha hada, .irp ada Lagna.
Hencet he lust quartero f sloka5 2 hints at the "tJrvisionosf  the
lord.so t'anglesf rom the Arudha Pada"..( Similarly, .Swamsa"o r
Frivr means the Navamsao ccupied by Atma Karaka i.e. Kara-
kamsaa scendant,v ide ch. 33, infra.)

The sage suggestst hat the signs ownedb y the lords of
Arudha f-agnaand of its anglesa re consideredgood for Varga
Division. This will bring many signs--sometimeass  many as g-
in the purview of this rule. [t hasb eenf elt necessartyo  bring
this liberala pproach contained in the sloka to the attentiono f
the reader. In my opinion, the truer strengtho f a planetl ies
in its Moolalrikona, exaltationa nd own signp ositions.

For the sake of brevity, the good Vargasi n number in the
context of Shadvarga through Shodasa Vafga are given special
designationass  detailedb elow :

If Shadvargas chemeis  consideredtw o or more suchg ood
Vargasa re known thus :

2. Kimsuka 3. Vyanjana4 . Chamara 5. Chatra 6. Kundala.
If Sapta Varga schemeis  used the same namesu pto six

good Vargasa pply while seven good Vargasg o under the name
Mukuta.



90 Brihat parasaraH ora Sastra

If l)asa Vargaschemei s resorted to, the good Vargasi n
numbera rec alledt hus :

2, Parijata3 . Uttama 4. Gopura 5. Simhasana6 . paravata
7. Devaloka8 . Brahmaloka9 . Sakravahan1a0 . Sridhama.

. The aulhor of SarvartbaC hintamanid esignate8s,  9 and l0
respectivelya s Amara, Iravata and VaiseshikamsasI.n  fact,
theset hreeare popularly known with these namesv iz. Amara
etc.rathert hanwith the onesg ivenb y Maharshi.

When ShodasaV arga scl.rcmies  wholly consideredt,h e
numbero f goodd ivisionsa rc knowna s :

2. Bhedaka 3. Kusuma 4. Nagapushpa 5, Kanduka
6. Kerala 7. Kalpavriksha8 . Chandanavan9a.  Poornachandra
10. Llchchaisravlal. Dharrvantar1i 2 Suryakanta1 3. Vidruma
14. Sakrasirnhasan1a5 . Goloka 16. Sri Vallabha.
. It maybe notedt hat mosto f event he hoarya uthorsh lve

not goneb eyondDasaV argascheme. The sageh asf ully explai-
ned all the I6 Vargasi nvolveds o rhat a planet'sa ctuald isposit-
ion is properlyk nown,

As far as Hora or half of a sign is concerned" good
Vargas" shouldb e flexiblyuseda s except he Sunand Moon,
noneh asr ulershipo f Hora. Jupiteri s in exaltationV argai f in
Moon's Hora. Thcn, for Jupiteri n Sun'sH ora, and for other
four in any Hora, how rJow c classifythe Varga?l n my opinion,
we havet o follow the hint giveni n slokal 3 of the nextc haptcr
that Jupiter, Sun and Mars givee ffectsif  in Sun'sH ora (as lar
as Hora is concerneda) nd the restof the planetse xceptMercury
in Moon's llora. Mercury is good in both. the Horas. So to
say,t hesea re good Horas for the concernedp tanets. Ii iollows
that Jupiter and Mercury are good in any Hora for Varga
classification.( Therea re further hints about Hora, vide ch.7,
sloka l3 onwards.)

Nextly,a  bricf clarilicationi s rcquiredd bciut thi: Sun add
Moon not bavingo rvnTrimsamsds.T he Surr can obcupyAries
in Trimsamsasa nd the Moon canbe ih Taurus lii Venusian
Trimsamsa. They cannotb e itr Leo or Cancer itr Trimsamsa
charts. Henceonly exaltationw ill apply to them in Trimsamsa.
' 

Now, coming back to the Vargan ames,q e will take up
some for clarifications. The word "Suryakantamsa"d enotes



Chapter 1 gt
that the planeto r the ascendanta,s  the case may be, has obta_
[ea.. t-Zg ood Vargas in the ShodasaV arga or t6 divisions.
Similarly "fi(fqiligf" or paravaramsain djcaLss ix.good Vargas
in Dasa varga scheme.o ne can understandt heset eims on ttrEsJ
lines.

sIeTE rifqiils{rrt: ile | |
Chapter7 

Divisional Consideration
estrqq uqrl3r{uqqarTf g fl€qf.+tfqi i E {ErEEr{{ |
c,i l€Tq fqari 6)uai qrqerfas\ ultl
ianrui rxrEciu l<d qatri qTqfq?en{l
geflarferrai ri fq,a{ erewirrdrr qrr
aqqti s'q"lqi enqici rrEi'nqrIT 
arc{rid rqr fqe}fqffa{ u}sntrt rrlrr
icrsgcu fEind qT(nlil ariq iTI 
.BqT€ilrrl fqsTq wrri fqflfilqFr* rrvrr
fqilw *<ar6'd qid *e qqrqq{ |
faniqr* Rcaqci tq+ei* {r$tls{$rq n{tl
srqiai{r* riq qsaq'{isfqq{tqta r
t" SeTfq qrsncir: TTrr6eir'{ffirfuqrr,q rt
*" qrul a r.-t 6) qrrf*qi qql q.r r
tteie $"rfq rtcsttct: tqiwrfuqfa: ql$r:l stl
tte glara Xtiaw rrqf{fdi qq} qqrI 
tft qlenwt!'rt *ErR sfaqrfeaur:. ctl

l-8. u.sE o{ THE 16 DIVISIONS .. I now explain the
iiseof theses ixtecnd ivisionsT. he physiquef rom the ascendant,
wealthl tom Hora, happinessthrough coborn frorn decanate,



92 Brihat Parasarq Hora Sastid

fortunes from Chaturthamsa, sonsand grandsons from saptha'
msa, spousef rom Navamsa,p ower( and position) from Dasamsa,
parents from Dvadasamsa,b enefits and adversities through
conu.yancesf rom Shodasamsaw' orship from Vimsamsa,l earn'
ing from Chathur Vimsamsa. strength and weaknessf rom
Bhamsa,eveil,f fectsf rom Trimsamsaa, uspiciousa nd inauspicious
effectsf rom Khavedamsa,a nd all indicationsf rom both Aksha-
vedamsaand Shashtiamsa:  these are the considerations to be
madet hrough the respectiveV argaso r divisions' The bhava
whosel ord is in a malefic Shashtiamsaw ill diminish, so say
Garga and othprs. The bhava whosel ord is in a beneficS hodas'
am.i (or Kalansa) flourish. This is how the 16 Vargasa re to be
evaluatod.

Noter t The, Shodasavargasa,p art from giving cluesa s td
thc dignity of a planet, can be usedt o delineate various Bhava
gffects. Thc proper instrumentsa re :

l. Ascendantf or thc wellbeing or otherwise of the
' physiquc.

-e2..  Hora for wealth.
Docanatefo r happinessth roughc oborn'

4. Chaturthamsaf or fortunes.
5. Saptamamsafo r dfnasty (i.e. progeny etc')
6. Navamsaf or sPouse.
7, Dasamamsfao r powera nd position( i.e. livelihoode tc')

. [. Dvadasamasfo r Parents.
9. Shodasarrsafo r conveyanceas nd rclatcd happiness'

tO. Virnsamsa for worship, spiritual progress' religious
activitiesc tc.

I l, Chaturvimsamsafo r academica chievements.
12. Bhamsaf< rrstrengtba nd'weaknqss..
13. Trimsamsafo r evils.
lr[. Khavedamsaf or auspiciousa nd inauspiciouse ffects'

. | 5. Akchavedamsafo r all generali ndications-
16, Shashtiamsafo r all generali ndications'



Clapter 7 93

fied in Chaturvimsamsah,e  will confer wide learning. Similarly
the other eventsb e delineateda ccordingly.

Slokas6 -8 needa  clearera pproach' E!--!!""" 
by a planet. If the said planet is in a malefic Shash"t*ia0msa'

Good and b
+

have specifiede arlier.
- 

Anothei cta;mcationT;6out the'lord of Shodasa:nsbae ing
benefic. If a planet is in the Shodasams(aK alamsa)o f a bene-
fic, then the house owned by the first-mentionedf lourishes,
The word ,,qIT" means "benefic'nw ithout referencel o "good
Vargas" vid--sel oka 52 of the previous chapter' Why the sage
choset hesee xceptionsis  inexplicable.

sq{TfEE qrig <ia*q qqAt qr I
q'it?fiilqli {feq iid fqi {$ns{qq ltelt
qqfiir: (r$rqqrfq qffsqitq{i fit{ |
rler fq-{ramiq fqqrqi Efoarftqq ll I ol l
rJrknlqd {tati qat{tai .@ riltqtT{ |
qt"i fif S"r Enf n;qcisfiqfrllllll

9-12. After assessintgh e 20 point strengtho f the ascending
degreeo, ther housesa nd the planets,t he good and bad effects
beieciared. I explainb elow the methodo f knowingt he Vimso'
oaka strength( 20 point strength)ju st by knowingw hich an idea
ii,t. ,.ru-it, of aitions of this birth and of former birth will
clearly emerge. The planets from the Sun on get full strength
when-ine xaltationo r in own signa nd are berefto f strengthw hen

in the 7th (from exaltation). In betweent,h e strengthb e known
by rule of three process. In the caseo f a planet owning two
.igi., ai.tio"tion of placemenitn  odd/even sign identicalw ith
own signb e made.

N o t e s : T h e m e t h o d o f c a l c u l a t i n g V i m s o p a k a s t r e n g t h i s
given in slokas l7'2't of the presentc hapter' The sagei nstructs
i-tt"t thit streogth will b,ehighly suggestive'

Other sources of strength are suggesteidn  slokas1 l'16'
Thesea re relatedt o assesas planett properd ispoSition'

. A planeti n exaltationi s fully powerfulw hile in debilitation
it is devbido f Vigour. If it is descendingi,' e' leavingt he exalt-



94 Brihat Parasaral lora Sastra

ation and transitting towardsdebilitation,degreeb y degreei,t s
strengthc liminishesa nd the planet becomesf ully void in the
debilitations ign. Again when it climbsf rom fall to exaltation,
graduallyi t gainsa rd becomesfully potentiali n exaltation.
- It is also statedt hat planetsi n own signsg et full strength.'
Here a distinctiollis to be noted.Male planetsi n males ignsand
femalep lanetsi n femalesingsg et full strength. Mars and others
each have two signs. Mars, a male planet, in own signi f in
Aries is bettert han Mars in Scorpio,a  female sign. Venusi n
Taurusi s betterp laced than in Libra. Such inferencem ay be
wisely made. Thesed etailsa re elaboratelydiscussedi n the rele-
vant chaptersi n the matter of calculationo f Shadbalae tc.

rqftufmnrcid farnqFuqfawwt 
rruisgq66'1 iti ulvXrrciir* lttRll
q{Aqsd rufrqlfqquTiqcr: t

utnr l
rql ?l-qrdq t qrr acq* r
9 \

er$w<} sirdFi fqrn+ ttl Ytl
raisgnnl( {Tai" iamruisfqf qfiilq+( t
lm qrirrtR aqiqnqtqfq rErqqll t{ll
qri: rsmid q.i qrtq(q famqfa: t
hvrffi frfqliiEqafq Kqq €!!il{ u l qu

13.16.H ORA, DECANATE AND TRIMSAMSA EFFE.
CfS .' Jupiter, the Sun and Mars give (pronounced) effectsi n
the hora of the Sun. The Moon, Venusa nd Saturnd o so when
in Moon's hora. Mercury is effectivein  both the Horas. In
the caseo f an evenRasi tle hora of the Moon will be powerful
in effectsw hile the Sun'shora in an odd sign will be so. Full,
medium and nil will be the effectsr espectively in the beginning,
middle and the end of a hora. Similar applicationsbe madef or
a decanate,T uryamsa, Navamsae tc. As for Trimsamsae ffects
the Suni s akin to Mars and the Moou is akin to Venus. The
effectsa pplicablet o Rasi will apply to Trimsamsa.

Notes : The three male planetsi n Sun's Hora will be reve-
aling while Venus, Moon and Saturna re good in Moon's Hora.



Chapter 7 gs

Here again,Sun's Hora of odd signsa nd Moon's Hora in even
signsare givenp reference. Now from this, it emergesth at Sun,
Mars and Jupitera re highly powerfuli n the first half of an odd
sign and Moon, Venus and saturn are very revealing in the
secondh alf of an evensign. Mercury is powerful in any Hora
whetheran odd sign or otherwise.

The effectsd ue to a Hora will be derivedf ully if the planet
is in the first one-tbirdp art of the Hora. The effects will be
mediumor nil accordingt o the placementsb eingi n the second
or third part of the Hora.

FriEl(qTTurimqnsriqr qfil r
hntvrrvq qqarrfq a fsfllqfiil: T*rrEnletl

sresf+ r
r€rqtrcciliqlrinin++ d? fq{qrr: .iq e}aaq u l ctl
ell: ild ad wrdiEr al rrfailqs': r
qt{ ni{ q irqrq aiqeri q il.rcnr:utqtl

17-19. VIMSOPAKA STRENGTH.' The Shadvargas( six
divisions) consistof Rasi, Hora, decanate,Navamsa,D vadasa-
msaa nd Trimsamsa. The full strength,f or eacho f the divisions
respect ivelayr e 6,2, 4,5,2 and l .  This is the Vimsopaka
strengthr elatihgt o Shadvargad ivision. Adding the Sapthama-
msat o the Shad Vargas,w e get Sapta Varga, the Vimsopaka
strengthfo r whichi s : 5, 2, 3,2t,412,2  and 1. Thesea re gross
strengthsw hile subtle ones should be understoodb y exact
positions.

Notes : Vimsopakas trengthi s the 20 point strengtho bta-
ined by a planeti n continuouslyoccupyingown Vargase tc. in
the various schemesli ke Shad Vargat o ShodasaVarga. For
fuller appreciations, eet he notes givenu nderslokas2 6-27of the
currentc hapter.

iTq|qrrtf qrieilAqr: s,ei{tt: qfraqmil: t
dxq fHqr: {qqaavivrtpr ? uQotl

20"q. A dd DasamsaS, hodasamsaan d Shastiamstao  the said
Saptha Varga Divisions,t o get the schemeo f DasaV arga( 10



96 Brihat ParasqraH ora Sastra

d iv is ions)TheVimsopakas t rength in th iscontex t is3 forRas i ,
5 for Shashtiamsan d for the other8  divisions'I  I each'

qtdnqr{r: qiflqi fq{q6T: qRdtfrat t
Brqq qi fq{iiq sd fkn'tlrr6q llltll

' ?6qr(q lssrqrrtqie ieraqi $q $q I

6lrrlaniq*mrui 5q?r{rf{ra: FqIE llRRll
6qi{rrq ag iri ari r;atntqq s I
eii md q fead i{r: scaq'flfi€rtQttqltt
sldqei q iururi Et'aq qqtqgET€a1t

TrI tqnlq'd fqqil qta' eqnfufqa* lllvll
n* ,iqErr clcd qt asl rdtfrel t
cre"lq 'drfu{ral q {dqr}qEi qiE ttlttt

2l-25. When the 16 divisions( ShodasaV argaS cheme)a re
consideredt ogether, the Vimsopakas core goes thus : Hora 1
Trimsamsal,  decanatel,  Shodasams2a,  Navamsa3 , Rasi 3l'

' Shashtiams4a,  and the resto f the nine divisions each a half'
The Vimsopaka strength remainsa s 20 (in the abovec omputat'
ions) only when the plun"t is in own houseV argas' Otherwis.e
iU.-iotuf'r,rength from 20 declinest o l8 in €xtreme friend's
V;;"t, to l5 [ frien<llyV argas,t o l0 in equal'sd ivisions' to 7

in eiemy'sV argasa nd to 5 in sworn enemy's Vargas' (These

figuresa re calledV argaV iswa.)

qifqqr: (qfq{sg{I: liftqrfrqlfqat: t
fqqqffiifiqqlrd tiqsqJ{ IrqE} t Q ttrqtt
il(t?i €qilFnqi E{th?i qaq{ 

11a1'
fa.{d gotnve e'lsd q{ <qqTf{qq llR\ell
26.27.V IMSOPAKA PROPORT|ONALE VALUATION :

Multiply the figured ue to full strength for the divisionb y the
V"ig" Vi."" ooi diuid" by 20 to get the exact strength of the
pf"oO. If the such total is below 5 tl-re planetwill not be

capableo f giving auspiciousr esults' If it is above5  but below
tO, ttrep lanetwill yieid someg oode ffects' Later on upto l5 it

. 
is indicative of mediocree ffect. A planetw ith above1 5 will
yield whollYf avourablee ffects'.



Clapter 7 97

_- - fotes : Vimsbpakao r 20 point.stpngth is catculatcdtbr
Shad Varga, SapthaV arga, Da*r Vargao n ShqdaraV arga, which-
ever is being coqsidered by thc astrologer. These Grga. ar"
detailed in the e4rlier slokas. By being in own Vergs a planit
getsf ull points of strengtha llotted to iSi n the eeqcerlrd scheme..
Thesea re tabulatedb elow for easygrasp :

Varga Shad Sapthe Dasa Shoilrsa
Jarga Varge Vlrge Yargr

' 
Rasi 6 5.0 3.0 3.j
Hora 2 2.0 l ; 5  1 .0
Drekkana 4 3.0 1.5 t.0
Navamsa 5 2.5 1.5 3.0
Dvadasamsa . 2 4.5 r .5,  0 .5
Trimsamsa I 2.0 . t .5 l . .o
Saptamsa 1.0 '1.5 

0.5
Dasamsa a 1.5 0:5
Kalamsa 1.5 2.o
Shastiamsa 5.0 40
Vimsamsa 0,5
Chatur Virnsanisa 0.5
Bhamsa . 0.5
T[tryamea 0.5
Khavedamsa 0.5
Akshavedamsa

. 0 . 5
Total 2A 20.0 20.0 20.0



98 Brihal Parasara Hore Sastra

The fgure against each individual division is celled
"Swaviswa". For -xample, in Rasi Division under Shodasa
Varga, you fintl 3.5 which is the Swaviswa.

Yarga Viswa is the total strengtha s shown in sloka 25 for
the various dignities like placerpenti n own house, extreme
friend's horse etc.

' If a planct is contlnuously in own Vargasi n the whole
of Shad Vutp scheme or any other, it gets all the 20 points
or full of Vimsopakas trength. This is alwaysn ot possible' By
virtue of a plrdement in other than own house, the points

diminish. In this contoxt, PanchadhaS ambandhao r compound
telationship is to be coneidered,a s learnt by us from slokas5 7-
5t ofch.3, cuprt.

To arrivo at the nct Vimsopaka, note the following
forpula :

Now see the following horoscopc of a native bornoo
11-2-1984a t 2?35 hrs. IST at New Delhi'

Rahu

Sun

Vcnus
Mercury

Lag
Sat

Ketu Mars
\



Chapter 7 I
Let us consider the Vimsopaka strengthf or the ascendant

lord Vgnus. His Vargad ignities and his relationshipw ith each
of the Varga Lords- is noted simultaneouslya longw ith Vims-
opaka. The longitudeo f Venusi s 9s 4' 32' 30",
Division occupation Lord RelationshipS V'/V yS
Rpsi Capricorn Sat. Adhimitra 6 18 5.4
Hora Cancer Moon Adhisatru '2 

5 0.5
Drekkana Capricorn Sat. Adhimitra 4 l8 3.6
Navamsa Aquarius Sat. Adhimitra 5 18 4.s
Dvadaeamsa Aquarius Sat. Adhimitra 2 tB l.g
Trimsamsa Taurus Ven. Own | 20. 1.0

In the above table, SV:Swavisva; vV:Varga Viswa and
VS:Vimsopaka 

' strength
The rest of the points will be clear to the readerf rgm thc

abovec alculations. And the Vimsopakas trengtls be €sti&atGd
accordingly.

Maharshi Parasaraf xes broad guidelinest o know thc usc
of this strengtha s under :

. 5 points Inauspicious results. (or neqtralisation
ofgood effects)

- 5-10 points Someg ood effects
l0-15 points Mediocre effects

'15-20p oints Wholty favourablee ffects.
In our example,V enusgets1 6.8p ointsa ndh encehe should

confer wholly favourable effects when Shad Varga.s cheno ir
considered. I would, however, prefer use of all tbe 16 Vargao
for a truer picture.

Minute evaluationso f Vimsopakaa re given on p. l0l for
a betteru nderstanding.

grersantFr qqnd iiq t i?i Rflrq I'
dat: guffi Eq: qqtE qqrq* ftqei: uR;rl
rfiFrrqti f{aT|{tcFn q] qririnqt r

. qoiqltnrE qria U.e[rcafrrifqwu: Retl
28-29. OTHER SOURCES OF STRENGTH: Maitteya,

there are other kinds of sourcesa s I explainb clow. plqnetg
in the 7th from the Sun will be fully effcctive. one ffi



/ 100 Bfihat ParasaraHoro Sastrc

identical lopgitudc in comparison to the Sun's will destroyt he
gmd effects. Rulc of thrce processb e applied to the ptanet in
bctwect these positions.

Notes : A planet away from the Sun is immune to tossof
rays, and can expr€ss itself fully. This need not be literally
misinterpreted that the one not beiog in the 7th from the Sun
will be ineffective. For example, we have Ubhayachari and
other yogasi n which case,a planet other than the Moon is
relatedt o the Sun by closep ositions. This doesnot mean that
thescy ogasw ill not fructify. If a planet is eclipsedi n the Sun,
it provesi mpotcnt. Thie appliest o Venus and Saturnas well,
againstt he common belid that these two do not lose rays cven
if combust and hence are free from Astangata dosha. This
euggcstionis  only for Ayurdaya calculations and rectifications
of planeraryr ays (or Graha Kiranas). Pleaseseet hs following
table for degreeso f combustion.

Combostlm In tllrect Combustionh (R)
nodor notlon

Moon 12"
Mars 17" ;
Mercury . 14" 12"
Jupiter I t " I  l o
Yenus 100 go
Saturn l6' l6 '

Rahua nd Ketu shouldn ot bet reatcda scombusat lthough
theymayb c longitudinallyc loset o the Sun. For theyare only
mathematicaplo ints. On the contrary, they eclipseo r obstruct
the Sun. A basic phenomcnonin combustioni s the planet
combusdt oesn ot heliacallyri seduringt he periodo f combustion
but is set.

q'ifrrfrqd id str n Fmiq t I
qsqa" qfii t+fi rmi qftdtfrnqltQoll
qifqtilqqi ilEq[cnRrltr: q(t I
g!fi TfftHoiqnE tnii{ frfq?dta ttlttt
Ad fifrrsi sr( €qckqrcrdqqrif clt I
qeq qetFdqgiF nsTrrfrF<rn rftqfa:u lltl



Clapter 7 lol
30.32. DASA EFFECTS VITH STRE-

NGTH z Maitreya, after assessintgb e vim"IsMoSpOakPaA sKtrAe ngtht hro-
ugh the various divisions, the rising and setting of the planetsb e
considered. The Vimsopaka strength is classrfieda s unser:
Poorna, Atipoorna, Madhya, Atimadhya, tleena. Atibeena,
swalpa and Atiswarpa. Thus shourdb e crassifiedth e vimsopaka
strengtha nd the Dasa period resultsd eclareda ccordingly.

Notes : The sageu ses8  distinct termst o crassifyth e efrects
of vimsopaka strength. I have.u sed ihe sameo riginal terms for
the sakeof identity while the table given below with percentages
of effectsd ue to the variousg rades will enlightoat he studenias

. to what theset erms imply.

Grade Vimsopakr pobts Beneficiale frectsd oe

Atipoorna 17.5 to 20.0 w.s-rw%
Poorna 15.0 to t7.s 75.0-87.s%
Atimadhya 12.5 to 15.0 62.s-75.0%
Madhya 10.0 to t2.5 50.o-62.s%
Swalpa 7.5 to r0.0 37.s--so.o%
Atiswalpa 5.0 to 1.5 2s.0-3T.s%
Heena 2,5 to 5.0 r2.r-2s.o%
Atiheena 0 t o 2.5 0-12.s%
. The perceDtagegsi ven by me are numericata ssignmentsfo r
a comparatives tudy so that an idea is gainedo r the gmdations
originally suggested;

qqrsdT{fq qc{rfq diq t rlg gqir ! |
wrwttafqqili hliar mqf,: nlltl
friqrqqrqnf i{ qq$qfuq I
faqqqrqRtqnrqnlkqfqfil Fd-ni u 
q,iq riqqqTrnq l'ytl

tlfiisr fqffi r 
qaaFaaqqqRrii 

3:darftetd,Aqr:nllrr
qg<ti  

gdcrt sqqifr &q]-{q ! |
T?rtqqq-qqafFr f"wTqrr{IlFr Q illqrr



lO2 "fuihot Parasaia lIota Sastm

33'36. ANGLES, rRl,iVES ETC' DEFINED O Maitreva'
"

lirten to other matters which I am explaining. T he Kendras
(engles)a re'specially known as ascendant, the 4th house the
O.J*a"ot aod tn" mid-heaven (the l0th house)' The 2nd'
stb, 8th and the llth are Panapharaso r succedentsw hile the 3rd,
6th: gth and the l2th are called Apoklimas or cadents' The 5th
and 9th from the ascendanat re known by the name Kona or
trine. Evil houses or Trika houses are the 6th, 8th and the
12th. Chaturasrasa re the 4th and 8th. The 3rd, 6th, l0th and
I lth housesa re UPachaYa.

Notes : The 12 housesi ncluding the ascendanta re classi-
fied into various gtroupswhich are as under :

. Kendraso r angles : Ascendant4 th, 7th and ,10th
PanaPharaso r Succedents 2nd, 5th, 8th and llth

Apoklimas or Cadents 3rd, 6th, 9th and l2th
. Konas or Trines 5th and 9th

ftifat or evil houses 6th, 8th and l2th
Chaturasras 4th and 8th

Upachayas 3rd, 6tb, lOtha nd llth.

qt-tr fiqgrlqq(ilql I
rfrq ll?ell

ddQfreg&eq?q t{trgmIi[: I
frtafiti{ qaqtfqqlt| fggamq.!{ lllqll

91-38.N AMES OF BHAYAS : The 12 housesa re : Thanu,
Dbane, Sahaja, Bandhu, Putra, Ari (etR), Yuvati, Randhra,
Dharma, K8rma, habha and Vyaya are in order the natnes
of houses. I explained thcseb riefly and leave it to you to grasp
bore according to your intelligece. As delivered by Lord
Brahma,s ome further information is added thus (i.e. in the
following verses).

Notcr : Each house is given a special name for casy
idcntity. The indications are known thus :

Tbanu : physique
Dhana : wealth
Sshaja : younger brpther/sister



Chapter7 103

Bandhu : rclatives
Putra : progeny
Ari : enemies
Yuvati : wife
Randhra longevity
Dharma rbligion
Karma acts( or livellhood)
Laabha gaine
Vyaya expenditure

'h'andhra" actually meansa  vulnerable or assailablep oint.
.{ planet in the 8tf, becomesv ulnerably placed. The raarious
(our.r in a nativity are relatedt o vnriougs phcreso f life- Ch. I I
dcals with the housesi n this context.

iq*sfq fqqilti qqhq aqlsqfi r
qtisfbqqn* ilri ilqqtq{t ql ute.tl
qf d* ql qri qF| qfrqfl?i qilE I
arntriaat ilri srQ (kei1 {eFTn von
qr{r( gR<ur<l ftSwrG{frsRqqt 
fqil{ rrszr$rrqegrf l( qo8 fqq}snq nvttt
g?€4 ir grl: $i, EtFrIqt:q qt Ifr: t
weqwrqrr€nfq q?qr{iql ?qn iTNtllfv Rll
q(qretGrd6d fqriri ilfr{rrttffii frq r
i{ atu scf dFd ae fim{ {rqTqlq{\lvtll

. 39-43. INDICATIONS FROM HOASES .' The 9th from

fhe ascendanta nd the 9th from the Sun deal with one's father.
effects are to be known from the 10th end llth

"Wcohuantteevde rf rom ascendantb e also knownl from similar houses
countedf rom the Sun. Whatever results are to be known from
the 4th, lst,2nd, llth and the 9th shouldalsob e known frqth
the 4th of the Moon, from the Moon sign 'itself and 2nd, I lth
and 9th from the Moon respectively.W hateverh as to be known
through the 3rd from the ascendantb e also analysedth rough tho
3rd from Mars. ?he 6th from Mercury bc also consideredi n



104 hrihat ParaEarah lora Sastrd

regard to indications dedvablc frorn the 6tn counted from
the ascendant. The 51L frOq , lhq ?th fron.lqp$a.and
both tbe 8th iZ6-from Satqrn stand for- consideration

of a particular Bbara (house).
Notes : We get lmportant cluesf rom the abovef ive vcrses' ,
It iq not enough if the hpuse concerneda s counled from

the ascendanits  strong and well disposedf or the prosperity of

tbe house. Such a bousef rom the signifying planet should.a lso
bc strong, For example,o ne will enjoy paternal happlnessu  me

9th from ttre ascendanta nd the 9th ftom the Sun are both well

orrnoscd rhe gth from the sun if occupied by a dcbilitated

;ffi;;; irine gtn lord from the Sun is weak' then the good

ioolotio* through pitru Bhavaa re neutralized. Now see a'
gist of the slokas :

(a) Fathcr to be ooncideredf rom thc 9th both from the

Sun and lagna.
O) l0th from Lagna to be corrclatedw ith thc lOth from

tf,e Sun-for patrimony, paternalr ites etc'
(c) llttrfrom l-agna to be correlated with the tlth from

the sun for gains (and for fathcr's longevity-as the llth isthe
3rd from the gth.)

(d) Thc 4th from tbe Iagna and from tho Moon are
reLrtedt o mother.

(p) Thc ascendant and the Moon sign relatc the physical
felicity of the natlve, and gencnl strength of t'he radix'

if l Thc 2nd from tho asccndaat and from the Moon be
investi-gateadb out one's sight, speech,le arning, wealth etc'

Gl The llth from ascendant8 trd from Moon for gainc,
elder brothert, fricnds etc.

(h) Thc 9th from ascendant and from thc Moon for
gcaeralf ortunec,r eligioa, meritorious activitics etc'

(i) The 3rd from Mars and from the ascendantb e s€enf or
coborn, couragee tc.

(j) Tho-6th fron. ascendanta nd from Mercury for
Oiscascsd,e bts,c nemies,c ousinsa nd the likc'

obtainment of progeny, their well biog, their prospcrity etc'



'  
ehapter8 105

(For a femaleth e 9th from Lagnaa nd from Jupiter in connec-
tion with childrena re to be scrutinized')

(l) Thc ?th from Lagna and from Venus for marriage,i ts

nature, consequencesd,u ration etc'

Saturn for death.
From this it wilt be seen that each of the 12 houses is

relatedt o somes pwific planet apart from the ascendant' These
rules ars very higtJY suggestive.

EIq( rr{tEftamqdls4tltl:l q tl
CbapterI 

Aspects Of The Signs
qq tqrftqdtqi. qq{tii lqq Tqq I

$aid sqeqrfqT S id llllll
l*** 

<rnfrsfugi fan t ilqr q{qGf, qnri* t
rprql;ftTtli{ ftq* qlqfr * a<tlultt
frcqqr* fqarssffir{f asqweq sqrqfa t
qq'tq$f qfqgcq Qa<e , qfiIqtcn llQll

l-3. SIGN ASPECT,S. ' O Maitreya, now detailed are ths
aspects emanating from the signs Aries etc' Every movable
siin aspectst he 3 fixed signs leavirrgt he' fixed sign adjacentt o

it] gvery fixod sigo lendsa spectt o the 3 movables ignsb arring
the adjactnt movable sign. And a cotnmon sign aspectst he
other three common slgns. The planet in a sign lendst he same
sspecta s tho sign (in which the planet is) does'

Notes : Apart from usual aspectso f plancts, Maharshi
Parasara dcatgw ith Rasi aspectso r sig. asp€cts'T hesea re also
usodb y sageJ aimini (a discipie of Vedavyata and author of
Poorva Meomamsae tc.) and rhis system c&met o be khown as
Jaimini $ystom though the original propounder is Parasara.



106 Brihst Parasara liora Sostta

Jaimini Maharshi is also an equally worshipped authority on.
astrology. He mainly usesR asi aspects, Rasi Dasasapart from
many other Dasas, Arudha Pada, Atrna Karaka etc. by long-
itudes, Karakamsae tc.

The current 3 slokast brow light on the sign aspects.Each
novable Rasi aspects3  fixed signs,I eavingt he nearestf ixed sign.
For example,Aries-movable sign-does not aspect Taurus but
Leo, Scorpio and Aquarius, Taurus-a fixed sign aspects
3 movable signs,viz. Cancer, Libra and Capricorn but does
not aspect Aries, the nearestm ovablesign. Gemini's aspects
are on Virgo, Sagittarius and Pisces. The planet in 4*sign
aspects slmilar signsa s above and also thc occupant thereof.
Hence, in these aspccts, longitudes of the aspector and the
aspecteda re ignorable.

The following table will represent the aspectsd etailed
above :

Sign/occupant Slgn/occupant
aspecting aspected

Aries Leo, Scorpioa nd Aquarius

Taurus Cancer,Libra and Capricorn

Gemini Virgo, Sagittariusa nd Pisces

Cancer Scorpio,A quarius and Taurus

L,eo Libra,.Capricorn and Aries

Virgo Sagittarius,P iscesa nd Gemini

Libra Aquarius,T aurusa nd lro
' 

Scorpio Capricorn, Aries and Canber

Sagittarius 'Pisces,G emini and Virgo

Capricorn Taurus, Leo and Scorpio

Aquarius Aries, Cancera ud Libra

Pisces Gemini, Virgo and Sagittarius



€lapter I l0?

tig dRrcr: Qa: q{Efd ftqrsgml,
f(qi5 dRqrr qi qrqfa e<iftratl ttvtt
sqqerr€q qatur qwgqqdeqill l
fq6ed f{fl <iar: qrwfrrqqqtqq: lttll

4-5. PLANETARY ASPECTS : A planet in a movable
sign aspects the other 3 fixed' signs leaving the fixed sign
nJxt toit. A planet in a fixed sign does not aspect the next
movabte sign but the remaining 3 movables igns' The one in
a common sign throws aspect over'the remaining 3 common
signs. sinultaneously a planet in the aspecteds ign is also
subjectedt o the aspectc oncerned.

Notes : The idea conveyedi n tbo two vcrsesc an be well
onceived from the notes given for the first three'slokasa trove.
With the help of thesef ive slokas,o ne can deducet he following '

from the horoscopeg iven as exampleb elow :

(a) Mars aspectsS aturn, Moon and the nodes.
(b) Venus, the Sun and Mercury aspectn one.
(c) Jupiter aspectst he Moon, Ketu, Sun and Venug.
(d) Saturn and Rahu asPectM ars.



108 DrihatP arasarart-o ra Sastnl
(e) Moon aspcctsM ars and Jupiter.

' (f ) Ketu aspectsM ars and Jupiter.
In the above,w e..considereodn ly planet to planet aspcct

so that we know the difference between this systfo or asp'"ci,
and thOusualo ne.

cfcaaxe{ qsi qqrq rgur}fedqr 
qea fq;qr€qr*q gfca*a: qrrr{qel qtl
nta telel *eql s{if(d aq}ri r
qqrt't qfiqt fqt t T{$Ffit q Efqndrr \err
t{T-frlo} E fqri qrq6i nilnfi.i dqT I
iqiqi qFrTTIffu{q f6t}ri arf fle<iqr rerr
q! aq{wrrt Tarfir(qqrfq er I
Eftami qfqaryi?ai fr fae fearciq rrqr

-by 
. 6-9. ASPECT{AL DIAGRAM .. As depicted Lord
Brahma,I  now narratet hd aspectuadl iagrams o that aspectas re
easily understoodb y a rnere sight of the diagram. Draw a
squareor a circle marking the 8 directions( 4 cornersa rfd 4
quarters thereot'). Mark the zodiacal signsa s under : Aries
and Taurusi n east,G emini jn the north-eastC, ancera nd Leo
in the north, Virgo in the north-west, Libra and Scorpioi n
the west,S agittariusin  the south-westC, apricorna nd Aquarius
in the south, and Piscesi n the south-east. The aspects( asp er
the oarlierslokas)c an be showni n a squared iagramo r circular
diagram( asper convenience).



etqtRuelsxlTrlttg: l l
Chapter9 

Evils At Birth
qrd wilfftr fqt ! frranliruafr qnia r
rerearqrfrffetqiq rilFrrr qt{'qid rrt rr

l. O Brahmin, first of all, estimateth e evilsa nd cheoking
factors thereof through the ascendant and then declare th!
effectso fthe 12 bhavas.

Notes : The ascendantis  the most important in the matter
of causinge vils or counteractinge virs till aiative is sz. tenca,
thc sage refers to the ascendant specificafly in thc ;"aa;;;i
Balarishta or mfant mortality and caurions (in the r.ri ,i"tui
that upto the age of 24, no definite assuranceasb out longevi(
be made.

The Moon becomes imponant in the matter of evits and
checkingf actors for longevity from the age of 32 upto e+ia 
And the sun v"ir.

is the centre in this t.rprit from ihe ue" of ii-.
This doesn ot mean that the evirsf rom the Moon do no-t of.rut.
till the 32ndy ear of age,a nd so on and so forth.

aqfrnfreeffw qr{( qtqfif, ar;qil: I
ffrnRra € ardEF qriltEfq q fq;aiE nlrr

^ Zr;Evils causing prgmatuie end existu pto the 24th year
of one'sa gq. As such,n o definitec alculationb f nfe ,pun 
be made *rouiJ

till suclryear of age,
Notes : While the saged eclarest hat upto the 

will not 24tby
e possibre ear, 

b it
to  decrared efinitervi nitre mattei;fr.;;;:

vity' other works rike Horasrra,J yotisharnavaN avaneethamu
S"luel version), Sarvartha Chinramani, Jathaka p;;tilh&
Ptalr Deepiks etc. say that longevity calcurationsw iil b;?;;i;
ti l l -"-.

the l2th yearo f age. 



110 Brlhat Parasara Hora Sastra

iI66t6gF(qwq;ir: Tt, dila {tfqr: r
tRR{ {QE: eqerque$:g dfra: rrlrr
nfna;ltaer: clrqTtr+drrq: r{tfaar: r
fu{ilqfns qr*q irti q"|rqffiiile rrvrr
c€r qFqft freqr: w: qntfiqgqTqqT: I
req eqmq fir* q srEil q fiqd a&q rrtrr
Frqfuilg} al nlfr qq.fr a qQfwc:r 
le{ateqneqeilsfq qliotrdlr qr {ir: uqtl

3-6. SHORT-LIFE COMBINATIONS (upto sloka 23) :
Should tho Moon be in the 6th,-8th, or the l2th from the
ascendanat nd be in aspectt o a malefic, the child will die soon.
If in the ptocess there be g benefic'saspect,i t may live upto 8.
If a beneflci s retrograde in the 6th, 8th or the l2th being in
aspect to a malefic, death will occur within a month of birth.
This is true only when the ascendanits  unoccupiedb y a benefic.
Should the 5th bc occupiedby Saturn,M ars and tbe Sunj ointly,
(early) death of mother and brother will come to pass. Mars
placed in the ascendantor in the 8th and be conjunct Saturn or
Sun or be in aspectt o a malefic,being bereft of benefic aspect
will prove a sourceof (immediate)d eath.

Notes : Here a pertinent query may emergeas to why the
sagem entionsc ombinationsf or preMture death while longevity
cannot be decidedly declared upto the 24thyear ofage as per
his own statement. These yogas will guide us to dctect thc
immediated efectsf or longevity and resort to remedial measureg
like firc sacrifice,p rayers,d onations, medicineetc. and save thc
from Akala Mrity.u or prematured eatb, vide ch. 5 of Horasarr.

The Moon in an evil houseat'birth and in aspect to a
malefic will cause.e arly death. Even a benqfic'sa spect on the
Moon, in the said Yoga, will causet he end at the age of E,
suggeststh e sage. If she is increasing,t his needn ot be feared.

t a  

T'rq{qat a6rr;lq{X* qR r
slRqltfffii qrii ,qrrtli ( *qfr uetl
tr{rlri ftre: q'tft: {Wqri qnrfirfq: I
fu|rq: ffiqF{ri R( qrdr fitquil rrcrr



Chapter9  1l I

fl{l rtte6(9"{rr fqqt Er;Eqr qfq I
edtq€qlqil qtq: q qrfil qqqfiqnq narl
f,<ui al* q'it qqg1st: niiqr: t
gr,cri gt: q* rrutt q dtqfr llloll
trn rr{ qET ieet: qriq*g<qa: t
fffiqrernrrct<) Ereqri l rrg.olfqq:u lltl

?-ll. If Saturn and Mars aspectt he ascendanta s the
luminaries join Rahu (elsewhere),t he child will live only for a
fortnight. Immediate death of the child along with its mother
will occur if Satrrrn is in the lOth, the Moon in the 6th and
Mars in the 7th. One will immediatelyg o to the abodeof Yama
(the Hindu god of death) if Saturn is in thp ascendantw hile the
Moon and Jupiter are in their order io the 8th and the 3rd.
Only a month will be the span of one's life who hast he Sun in
the 9th, Mars in tbe Ttha nd Jupiter and Venusi n the'l lth. AU
planets( i.e. any planet) in thc l2th will be source of short lifc,
specificallyt he luminaries, Venus and Rahu. But the aspect of
one of these four planets (on the l2th) will counteract suc\
evils.

Notes : One of the 4 planetsa mongt he Sun, Moon, Rahu
and Venus in the l2th will contrib'utet o prematuree nd. If there
is aspebto f one of theseo n the l2th, the evils for premarure
deatha re checked. (This goest o prove that Rahu has aspects.)
The however,i n the,l2th for Libra ascendanwt ill confer a
lifc span of I

qmGlnt: {trit qi urQriq*.qf{ |
qt<tfirqfrn Ttqs: firril: tttRtt

12. TheMoon iscapable of causing earlyend if she is
with a malefic in the 8th, ?th or thc ascendanta nd unrelatedt o
a benefic.

H-'se&ri q'?trrqi qugl* faryqtq i r
ltiqi rr?rtnq{q i"lrt: srGrmq{ utltl

13. Earty death will come to passi f there be a birth in the
morning or eveningj unctions or in a hora ruled by tho Moon



ll2 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

or in Ganoantaw hile the Moon and mabfics occupyanglesf rom
the ascendant.
, Notes : There are tbree yogas denoted for premature
death: 

(a) Birth in Sandbya( as defincdi n the next sloka).
t,/ $) Birth (i.e. asendanti)n  a Hora ruled by the Moon.

(For Hora, sees lokas5'6, ch. 6.)
1-k) Birth in Gandanta.
v In each of the three yogas,i t is b prerequisite that thc

tngles from the aScendanbtecapturedb y the Moon and malefics.
Ganosnta:  The last Navamsaso f Cancer,o f Scorpio and

of lisces are called as Gandanta. According to a host of
authors,m ere GandantaLagna or the Moon in Gandantr will
causep rematured eath,

€q {sqdTratsnrqqr ri iuqf fMlm r
rtqrqTqqqX { na: itn ftmfrw tttvrl

14. DEFINTTION OF SANDHYA .' 3 Ghatikas belore
the sigbt of the semid isc (half ) of the rising Sunand a similar
duration following the Sunset are calleda s morning twilight
and eveningt wilight, respectlvely.

Notes : Morning tvrilight (or Pretah Sandhyr) lasts for
?2 minutesi n the morning oeforet he sight of the Sun's disc
(locally)a nd eveningt wilight for a similar durat'lona fter the Sun
iet. This definition of Sandhyab y the sagei s for decidingevils
to longevityi n childhood'

ln the context o.f Kala Dasa,S andhyai s definedd ifferently
by the sageo, bvi,ouslyw ith a purpose,v ide ch.46 of Yol' II.

atRqtrq|dq Wq"toi{ rfui t
crqrrf rq{ wR nserrqt fqifRuilul{rr

15. EARLY DEATH .' Should all the maleficsb e in the
orientalh alf while beneficsa re in the occidentahl alf, earlydeath
of one born in Scorpio will follow. In this caset herei s no
needo fany rethinking'

Notes : The area of the horoscope from the 4th cusp to
the l0th cusp via the 7th housei s known as occidcnta(lo r
western)h alf while the rest half is oricntal (or eastern)h alf.



Chapter 9 | 1,3

One born in Scorpio ascendant with malefics in the
oriental half and bhenficsi n the occidentalh alf will face imme-
diate death. This yoga is catled as Vajra Mushti yoga by
Yavanacharyas,a s quoted by Kalyana Varma' The Moon
should be in the Qccidentahl alf if she is a beqrfic or be in thc
.oriental half if she is a malefic. If Mercury remainsu nafricted,
by a malefic, this yoga will not come to pass.

a

atlt{T?rttt:
9 $iqrruttffi r

qrqq?dq* ili qiqtq 1fd qt( rrtq,tt
16. Malefics in the l2th and tbe 6th, or in the 8th and the

2nd while the ascendanti s hemmcdb etweeno ther maleficsw ill
bring early death.

qqsrcqqt qrql TalsR wixa:1
q{r iRftm: qlri: fiaqlqittrcrttlstt

17. Malefics occupyingt he ascendanat nd the 7th whilc
the Moon is conjunct a malefic with no relief from a benefic will
also causep r€mature death.

dtai ffifi ttGnq qti: *'ilGatrqi: r
ql tfftr $tqFilfil ( fqiu I a riuq: nlqtl

18. Early deathw ill be inflictedo n the nativei f decreasing
Moon is in the ascendantwhile mllefics capture the 8th and an
angle. There is no doubt about that.

qttlqlfrq{rq?r} i{rilEef;rqwtq: r
ufa<rgqrT.i]fr ql stn: t fuqra<tutqtt

19. TheMoonintheascendant8, th,  l2th ot theTthand
hemmedb etweenm aleficswill confer prematured eath.

qq6qwuunil qei irrd€qrf$ti :
wilr6a** qrtr qIaT r{ tt: fit{: ttRott

20. Should the Moon be in the ascendanht emmedb etween
two maleficsw hile the 7th or the 8th hasa m4lefic in it, the
child will face immediatsd eath along with its mother.



il4 Brlhat Parasara Hora Sastrit

$ffiqlnq ftenueftaig E l I
ntqtEqqruh d Errill frq{qa: ltlttl

' 
21. ShouldSaturn, the Suna nd Mars be inthe l2th, 9th

and 8th without benefic's aspect, the child wiil face instant
dcath.

qicrrri q qrfi{i q€4t lnqraor} rr$ |
dtqqrct fqilirq: qql {tfil frfrq ulitl

22. With a malefic in the 7th house or in the rising
decanatew hile decreasingMoon is in the asccndant,d eath will
be experiencede arly.

andfimqftq-fl: ri r$ qqfTdfrilrr r
qqci qr frFni qr ilTn1: qtaq6\ ltqitl

23. The life span of the child will be either 2 months or
6 mooths only, if all planetsd evoid of strengtha re relcgatedt o
Apoklima houseg( i.c. 3id, 6th, 9th and l2th:)

fr&, qqqtr qil q?rqt aft gat r
{rqinil q}f,sq q{d q.i qiq nRYtl

24. EI/ILS TO MOTHER (upto sloka 33) .' The motler
Of the nativew ill incur evils (will die soon) if the Moon at birth
ic arpectedb y three malefics. Beneficsa specting the Moon will
bring good to the mother.

qi <tgtq,gt: tlfr: qqT r<t ficrd:r 
irer ffq{iqqi"i fH( wqt rrRru

25. Shouldt he 2nd be occupiedb y Rahu, Mercury,V enus,
Sun and Saturn the child's birth hasb eenafter its father's death
while event he mother wili facee arlyd eath.

nqrftFilqrEKi q?i qrlnfifiqi r
qfqfir: rnnl'ci qrfr mfr rqqr nRqtl

26. lf the Moon is in the 7tbl8th from a malefic, be her-
self with a malefic,a nd be aspectedb y a strong malefic,p redict
mother's end to be early.



Chapterg _ ll5

sEqw] qrsq flqe€r: wiltr* qiltf?t: I
qriqft\r\ rigm emrqfliq Eit{F(u Rsrl

27, The child will not live on mothet's milk but on that of
a ehe-goatif  the Sun is exaltedor debilitatcd in the 7th.

Notes : For an Aries native, if the Suni s in the 7th in
debilitation, or in the 7th in exaltation for a Libra nativq it
deprives one of mother's milk. The 7th rules thc 4th from the
4th and hencet he 7th is referred to.

Saturn in the 4th house will'alpo deprive om of mother's
milk.

Atmakaraka in Scorpio Navamsa will producc similar
effects.F or a definition of Atmakaraka, seech. 32,lnfra.

iTFilI€qTq{: qrm frguti wil rtq r
r<t qr.cedg ufE *Fi qFE q* r iq trle tr

28. Should a malefic bc in the 4th, identical with an inimi-
cal sign, counted from the Moon while there is no bcnefic in an
angle,t he child will lose its mother in a prematurem tnoer.

ur<{i ftgmi q qar , fiqqfi witl t
irfl qlq*d fcuraE{ Ent ftq,uRc.tl

29. Maleficsi n the 6th and l2thwill biing,cvils to mother.
The child's father will receive similareffects if the 4th and l0th
are capturedb Y malefics.

trfi T* rli 1<l ul qlsq6'iq q r
' qqi E{: qfql€tit(r llQoll

3"0*.1 M ercury in the 2nd while maleficso ccupyt he asc&nd'
ant, 7th and 12th : this yoga will destroy the entire family.

qwi q grl qtt qt rqt qciH t
rfr i=q?qrri raqrnl irgltt  frrft tti ttt

31. Jupiter, Saturn and Rahu rcspectively positedi n the
ascendant2, nd and 3rd will causem otheils death early.



l r6 Brihat ParasaraH ora Sostra

qftqqrrn$fdunt: qrt: qlqfqqfrii: r
qmqfuqiqrnf qor1p1ttt Ft irq: ttiqtt

32. Doubtlcssly the pother will give up the (hild if it has
melcficsi n trines counted from the decreasingM ooi. No benefic
lhsll bc in coqiunction with the said malcficg.

qrl{Rrrqt r;cr<l qr g*dt lro r
ufnlrqqill rl il fanqraia ffi,! ulQu

33. If Mars and Sgturn are together in an angle with
rcfcrencct o the Moon and occupyo ne and the sameNavamsa,

, the child will havc two mothers.Y et it will be short-tived.

qfi q?A ql qtq: qweqri q q;rrn: I
ft,ictrrrlrtttrrq fiKrdclq *qfrr nQytl

34. EYILS TO FAT'EER( upto sloka 42) .. One'sf ather
rill insurc arly{ eath if Saturn, Mars and the Moon in thcir
ordceare in tho ascendant,h c 7th and the 6th.

qA Eftq'f ut r'r<frqlqdqTcrw I
l@ ilrq fitrrq ffi frilr trttn

35. Thc nstive will at thc time of his marriqge lose his
father if Jupiter is in the ascendanwt hile Saturn, Sun, Mars and
Merorry arc together in thc Znd.

q{: flln Rgiil gq{r qqqurrr: I
Wfq q.cqq: qrtRnn frqqal qtE rrlqtr

36. Early los of father will take place if the Sun is with a
malcfic or is hemmedb etweenm aleficsa s there is anothermalefic
in the ?th from the Sun.

(cili qql q{r rr{€* qfirrr<rr:r 
<qdn t qeiq frrn mlt ffr ulstl

37.Remotewill be the possibilityo f one'sf athers uetaining
lf thc Suni e in the 7th whilc Mars is in the l0rh and Rahui r in
the l2th.



Chqte9r  lt?

c$q?ft tr{| qtq: r|1*frqfi{il: I
ffi irn anag fqs fiur' a inq: llQell

38. Early and doubtless will bc one'8 father'g dcath if
Marsris in the lOth idcntical with his enemy'ss ign.

Notes : Mercury is the sote encmy of Mars, vide ch. 3'
verso5 5. Mercury's campsa re Gemini.and Virgo' Hence, for a
Sagittariusn ative or for a Yirgo nathe, Mars in the lOth (alonc)
will causee arly death of father.

frge*t* qqn qil} tttf,Tltf. rtirrt: I

Tq{q ftq} sqfi fqet ts t !frqfil lllett
39. The Moon in the 6th, Saturn in the ascendanat nd

Mars in Fe ?t.1 : thb array of hcavcnly bodiesa t birth will not
ensureI  long spar of life for thc father.

q'H{rnfrqi qnl {rf-{il Er ftttfqi r
rrrrwl falfn: wl{qqstsft frm}:f qq:t tvott

4Q. If the Sun is aspectcdb y Saturn and be in Aries/Scor'
pio NavLmrp, the father would have givea up thc family beforc
thc birth of the child or would have passeda way.

qq{ qlt} $ql arefr q ra ffi t'
fril{ qlar Fqr f{fie{rrf,r q*( llvttl

41. lf the 4th, loth and l2th are all oocupied by malefice,
both the pflrentswil leave the child to its own fate and *andcr
from placc to Place.

Notes : Also sees loka 8, ch.lO infra,

qtu{ilql fqail qfi flsq rqr{t r
qqlfinrft?t q'n gqffid i qrqR llvRll

42. The father wlll not seet he native ti|'l his (the nativc's)
23rd yeqr if Rahu a1d Jupiter are together in an inimical rign
identical with the ascen{anto r the 4th.
,' Notes : The inimlcal signsf or Jupiter are that of Mcrcury
and Venus.R ahu is inimically placed in Cancer, Leo, Arics md
Scorpio. Jupitcr is friendly in these signs. It ig hene implicd



ll8 Brlhat parasoraH ota Sasffa
that theset wo should join in ohe of theses igns as 4th or the
lOth so that the father cannot see the native till the latter
is 23.

However, ihc rute needsa  cautiousa pproachi n view of the
clash bctween inimical places for tfie two plahets. Mercury is
Rahu's neutral. Hence if Mercury is tempeSariryi nimicar for
\ahu, then Rahu's placement( along with Jupiter) in Gemini or
virgo as the 4th or the ascendant* ill caur. the dvent.I n other
casest,his will have to be wlsely interpreted.

w!: frm q qF(ii wrl qrarc tq q I
qtv{fce$} qql: rnrreqq6}1i fl uvltl
fqlfltd fMtqlfte{iMarqfrfrqilq r
qnl: qtaraqrfrt: qri: qt# |
gqqTfifrqtsfq fr"frea ftftfaiq uyytl
qq qAE frni: lrtqfq wa forrr,iq r
rtnsqqfqiitn tta il Tqqrfari( uy\tl

43-45. PARENTS : The Sun is dhei udicatoro f father for
all beingsw hile the mother is indicated by the Moon. Should
thc sun be aspectedb y marefics or be hemmeu betweent hem
will causee vils to father. Similarly the lfioon be consideredi n
respocto f mother. Malefics in the 6th, gth or 4th from the sun
will br$g inauspiciousre sultsa bout the father. Malelics in such
placesf rom thc Moon wiil 6e adverse for the rotnr.. irr"
strcngth or otherwise of the occupants concernedb e suitably
cstimated.

srqnsRuartqpwidlt: o ll
Chepterl 0

Antidotes For Evils
IiqficGqdf l frid rqngrvrft 6qi I
qqmr*'fi qreraiffi rtqlu: rrlrr



Chapterl 0 I 19

l. Those are the evils (due to a native). I now iarrate the
antidotes for such evils as y',ell, which will bc helpful to assess
the extent of inausPiciousness.

Notes : The antidotes mentioned herc are in the contert
of short life. Wbile somem ay carry with them the concept of
fortunate yogps,e very principle doesn ot.

qdsfr antgnuri qrarq hrq* qft t
srRcef afwi qFa Rfqt qrsrt q{n lllll

i2. Should one anrongM ercury, Jupiter and Venus bc in
an angle from the ascendanta, ll evils arc destroyeda s the Sun
eliminatesd arkness.

qfi gq qq"t aiti qqrql ftceiwl t
qf< rnn{ qrfiqr wTFT fq rtfq?: nln

3. Just as a singte reverential obeisanceb eforoL ord Siva,
the Trident holder, freesone from ali sins,a  singlc but strong
Jupiter in the ascendantwill ward off all thc evils.

Notes : In the caseofC apricornascendantJ,upitert herein
should be eiceedingly strong by other virtues, as otherwise
he can lead to shqrt-life. For, sagoBhrigu specificallyhints at
Madhyayu or medium spanof ffe with Jupiter in the aecendant
idcntical with debilitation or inimical sign or malcfic'r cign.

gs gq Rq,in: trlieql qqrfiqr: I
qfrcE frfqri qfn framl feSt uw rrru

4. The ascendant lord is singly capable of counteracting
all evils if he ie strongly placedi n an angle just as Lord Siva,
the holder of Bow, destroyed the three cities (built of gold,
silver and lron by Maya for the demons)

qKqd qrqffirq wi qlgqf{dtH t
fqrrfd SGqq* aqrRaaf<rrnrir rir

5. All evils are destroyedi f a bcnefica spectsth e ascendant
of onc born during night in thc bright half. Similarly,a malefic's
aspecto n the.cacendantof onc born during day tlme in the dark
half.



l2O Brihat ?arasam llora Sasrra
Notes : The *cond statement does not imply cvits to

longevity -dav-birth 
if a benefica spects the arcendant for a in

Krishna Paksha (or dark-hatf). That is howevlr oot roougr, ir
exists,b ut a rnalefio'sa specti s required.

qqctrfi qil qfqqeri ( wrqtr 
ufti( s rrrnEtfoer" tefuafedniq\rqrr

6. The sun in thc l2th wil confcr a hundred-yeart ife span
on one born in Libra ascendant.

gq-qltt qI td gvcdswr gq: I
tsnfrqri{ q w{n{r: qmqriq rrurr

7. It will prove auspicious for the mother ar well as the
native if Mars joins or ie aspectedb y Jupiter.

tE{q} qtq: qlrqqci rnt rriq r
ftq: nltunl firr: q*: *Efrolq,i: nctl

8. Though mareficri n the 4th/r0th arc a sourceo f evil for
the fathcr, .they turn auspicious if hemmed uy ucnencso r ii
beneficsa re in trines or in angles.

Rtq|ffiq*. mt: {{: iqfqdqrt: r
(d ilrtqisRe qurdmnd a ilE tc.tl

9. If maloficsa re surroundedb y bencficsw 
triner hilo 

aret hemservc angles/
bse nefic-occupieodv ilsd isappeasr o;=N;i

only tbis, cvilr will not foltow from tbe bhavasc oncerled.

sm qtt?Frlifiteqlqf:t t?fl
Clrptcr ll

Judgemento f Houses
rro ilsq$ qtd a* qqr ql r r
stqq qrqr(sdi ft f$ fffi{ffi -r-t 

<eu lrr



Clapter ll l2l

l. O sage,I  have come to know of thc eviis and antidqtes
thereof as wcll from you. Please tell ma, what is to bo deduccd
from each houss.

it G{ s ar{ q qd *q .rfirqqq I
gd 1:Ri tmnrsq qrtqlqTHhriq ttlrr

2. INDICATIOIVS OF THE FIRST HOUSE ; ffhe sage
replies) : physique,a ppear&ncein, tellect (or the organ of intelli-
gence, i.e. bmin), complexion of the body, vigour, weakness,
happiness,g riefand innatcnature are atl lo be guesredth rough
the ascendings ign.

Notes : We ar terselyt old here of thc prime indications to
bo deducedf rom each house.T here are many matters related to
eachh ousew hlch I have listed rather exhaustivelyi n my English
translation of Horasaro. Seep p 183-187i bld.

qqenaf t€rqt€ Ti5qraqfqsq I
Erq((-{rRd €{ ffftenilFrilutq il1rr

3, SECONDHOASE .. Wealth,g rains( food etc.), family,
death,e nemiesm, etals,p reciouss tonese tc.are to be undcrstood
through the 2nd house.

firnq qiqflTeTft qHnqqlqnq I
frd{rrq'di ffi gftqqqrw fq{tqi{ rrvrr

t 4, THIRD IIOUSE.. From thc 3rd house,k now of the
following : tilour, lervants (attendantsc tc.), brothers, sisterse tc.
lbitiatory instrucitobs (gctsr), journey, and parent'ad eath.

qqil-qq qqrq qqqlwfrrrnqfq r
ftfu ai{ Td ile TdqtE qRfqqiqr rrrr I

5. FOARTH HOUSE .. Conveyancos,r elatives, nothcr,
bappinosst,reasure,l andsa nd housesare to be consultedf hrough
the 4th house.

qefqail mr frqt Teqi{ rq?ilnrTI 
g"T|cqrtr*vn{h wiq gncaq Iq: ilqtl



122 Brilat P.arasaral Iora Sastra

6. FIFTH HOUSE .' The learned s\ould deducc from the
5th housc amulets, sacred spells, tearning, knowledge, son8,
royalty (or buthority), fall of positior etc.

rrgerawiwai wi{*q wnkqilr.r
wi-{tq6t qrfq qtaqrdfiTit{iq rrurr

7. SIXTII HOUSE .' Maternal unclo, floubts about deatb,
cnemies,u lcers,s tep mother ctc. are to be estimated from thc
6th house.

silqrtreqxqtuir r qrfqc{ raa{tfiqq r
qwd q F{eltq ErttrqrflFdttrit rrcrr

8. SEVENTH HOUSE .' Wife, travel, trrdc,loss of sight,
deeth etc.be known from tbe 7th house.

qq wi fq qfq g'i lte1{ ?nnI 
nsgtrfrrd r{ qlia;arfrqalT: lterl

9. EIGHTH HOUSE : The 8th house indicatesl ongevity,
battle,e nemiesf,o rts, wealtho f the deafi and things that have
happeneda nd are to happen( in the palt and future births).

qrd wnd q u{ q Eqqiffitiwqt r
dttqrnff qi u{wnrfirffiq nlorl

10. NINTHH OUSE. ' Fortunes,w ifc'sb rother,religion,
brother's wife, visits to shrinesctc.b e known from the 9th
house.

tra{ lttrwffr q qrd *q frgemr r
nqrqu rydRqTfq qlqrqrilGitaM{ illttl

. ll, TENLH HOASE.' Royalty( authority),p lace,p rofass-
ion (livelihood),h onour, father,l iving in foreign landsa nd debts
are to be understoodf rom the l0th house.

Notes : "Father" is to be studied through the l0 hoirc,
ap per the above sloka. The sageo bviously referst o the l0th in
this contextas the l0th is ths 7th from the 4th. Westerna strolo-
gerst oo follow this view.



Chapter ll r23
Here we need Some elaboratiof. The statuso f the father,

bis family (i.e. consistingo f the native's mothere tc.), and the
final rites the native will perforrp to his father will all have to
be known through the l0th hoLse.T he father as an individual
and his well being etc.b e exaqined from the 9th house. The
sagealso discussesth e father with referencet o the 9th house in
one of the ensuingc hapters.

Thus it follows that bqth the 9th and lOth.are primary
housesr elatedt o father. r,\,

irilqqJqq€qrfr !?arqrfawq q I
BTrri$  qT{i q rrErr{rTqrGi{lqruqtqR tl

12, ELEI/Eftfn nOUSp.. All articles, son's wife, in
come, prosperity, quadrupedse tc. are to be understoodf rom the
llth house.

.qd q iRga-R:qq?i{Rti ilen I
rqqtEtq A aftrafqf6 q4r qlqnrutlt|,

13. TWELFTHH OUSE..Fromthe l2thhouse,o necan
know about expensesh,i story of enemiesd, ne'so wn deathe tc.

ql ql {T{il} Ere} rnE} qT qklcatq I
til x1d Trwpq. g.qrdlErsfq i{frirrqvrr
aefmwcrq ?rf,iqrqslad qt tq: I
qu{ qrqqfddceRe+{rni*{i te: uttrr
qd q *ai qraq gw) 1a\*srqr I
qlfs* fls€qq n€rrq d teaatq4q rrlqrr

14.16. PROSPERITY OR ANNIHILATION OF A
HousE .' Predict'prosperityo f the housew hich is conjunct or
is aspectedb y a bgnefic.A lso when its rord is in yuvavastha or
in Prabuddhavasthoar  in Kaumaravasthoar  in the l(hh house,
the bhava'sw ellbeing is indicated.T he bhava which is rot urp."-
ted by its lord or whoser ord is with a maleficpranct or with one
of the lords of evil and sucho ther houses( i.e. lrd, 6th, gth, llth
and l2th) or is defeated in a pranetary war or is in one of thc



124 Erthat parasara Hora Sastrtt

threc Avasthas, viz, Vriddhavastha, Mritavastha and Suptava-
sth8.

Notes : The prosperity or wellbcing of a housc is assurod
undcr the following conditions :

(a) Thc housc that containsa benefic.
O) The houset hat is aspectedb y a bdnefic.
(c) The housew hosel ord is in Yuvavastha or in Kunrara-

vastha.T heset wo Avasthasa reomong tha 5 Avasthas,v iz. Baala,
Kumafa, YUtbna, Vriddha and Mrita by being in 6. portione
rcspectively.T his is for an odd sign placement.I t is reversei n
tic caseo f an ever,s ign. Arlo seec h. 45 infra.

Soto sayi fthe lord ofa housei s in 6. to lgoofan odd
eign,he will be in one of the two Avasthasr equired. Alternati-
vely, it shbuldb e between 12'and 24' of 0n evens ign. (If a
planot ls debilitatedo r is combust,t he goods citcd are void).

(d) Praluddhavastha is another name for Jagradavastha,
meeninga  stoteof awakenness.T his applies to a planet in own
eignor in cxaltationsign.T he bhavao wnedb y an exaltedplanet
or plecedi n own signf lourishesE. xccptt he luminaries,'theo ther
ffve own eacht wo housesI.t  is (tue that a planet owning'two
houses if placed in own house, it predcrminantlya cti. on
behalfo f that houseo ccupicd by it. simultaneouslyi,t s another
hourea lsog etss trengthenebdy  virtue of sucha  pracementF. or'
oxamplo, Saturn ownst hc 3rd and 4th for Scorpioa scendant
11d it hc is in the 4th, he wiil mainryg ive good efficts of the 4trr
(hie Moola'trikona house)-T his dois oot o'eao that the 3rd
houre is left uncaredb y him.

(c) The houseo wned by a planet placed in thc lOth from
the ascendantw ill produce good resultr. I would prrf*, i, io U"
closelyr elatedt o thc r0th cusp (or mcridiari) toi it is tne nosi
cffective potnt of thc natus. For details, seen otes for rule l, ch.
2 of my work, ,.Doctrinor 

' of Suke Xsil-Retnld.,,
Nert we zue told of thc conditions under which a house

suffer8a nnihihtions which are :
(a) The bhava unaspectedb y its lord does not fourish.

Each bhavacannot be under theaepect ofitsrord. rhenthis
does not irean thar the bhava sufttrs annihilation. It rnay bc
sonstrusdt hat in tne absencc ofsuch an aspect,t hc bhavac an



Chapter ll I25

look upto alternative sourcesa s mentionede artier. If a malefic
relation is ihere for a bhava,i ts lord's aspect on it is an
aotidote.

(b) The lord of a bhavaj oining a.malefici s a disadvantage
for the bhava. If the saidm alefic is a frierdly planet to the bhava
tord or if they joii in favourableh ouses,t hen the evil ie minimi-'
zed. Evgn if it is an exalted malefic, tben also good effcctsm ay
be cxpected.

(c) The .lord of a house in conjunction with the lord of
6th/8th/ I 2th cennot be ."productiveo f good. If he himself is en
evil lord, then some relief can be expected.T his is mainly from
ayo& point and not in all resPects.

(d) If a planet is defeated in planetary war, its bhava's
potencei s void.

Normally, we are taught that when two planetea re on the
samedegreet hcre occursa  war and the one with lcsseglongitudc
is declaredwinner. The r into war.

In this connection, pleaser efer to ch.79 (Vol. II.of our
presentw ork).

' 
The late C. G. Rajan has a detailed and elaborate account

of planetary war. According to him if two planetsh ave identical
longitudes to the minute of arc there is a planetaryw ar, (This
doesnot involvel uminaries).He addst hat they shouldb e on the
same latitude, i. e. both northern or both southern. The one
with higher latitude is declared winner. He givesa n example
involving Saturn and Mars as under, for 0347 hrs on l5th
Dcccmbcr1925: 

Longitude Latitude
Mars 209' 24' 0N2 l
Saturn 209'24' 2  N25

He decleresS' aturn as the winner as he has advanced
latitude.

We need not rush to the conclusion that Mr. Rajan's vers:
io_ni s contrary to Parasara's.W e should appreciatet he pains
taken by Mr. Rajan in throwing more light on the subjeci. He
givesm orc advanccda nd sound arguments which are not being
reproducedh crc.for the sakeo fachicving brcvity.



126 Brihat Parasara Hoi.s Sastra

For practical purposes,w e are well guided by the claborat-
ion of Mr. Rajan.

(e) The housew hosel ord is in Vriddhavastha( i.e. of an
agn0ceq 3gg) F*om_esi neffective from the view point of good
results"FpEnfiiIEEIitftFT8'-240 of an odd sign or betiveen
6o and 12" of an even sign is said to be in such an Avastha.

(f) If a planet is in Mgi!rygllA(in extremis) its bhava
wil!-be.destroypd. This state ffis to a planet in the firffif
an evensignor in the last 6" of an odd sign.

(g) Lastly,a  planet in $uptavasthan eutralisesth e "trect sf
t@ This-Avastha-isd ue to a debititated
planeto r the one in an inimicalc amp.

The readerwill thus seet he significanceo f the presentt ryo
slokas,

HemaprabheS uri, a Jain astrologero I'eminence,e numera-
tcs a principle in his work'.Trailokya prakasr" (editedb y Ram
Sarup Sharma, Lahore) that the bhava occupied or aspected
by the Moon undergoesg ood or bad effects.T hat is, if the Moon
is increasing,g ood effects will increase; otherwiseeffectsw ill
diminish.

qqrr {$Trq$qlgqF[: il 
I t Rr  tD

Cbapter12

Effects Of First House
$nql t6*ssarRawl
*;i r'lui ftudsql)s:r <r *(gd ftriq rrlrr
il'i*staqa] {ti n1i tag{ qeE I
{wr: trrfe*qrw uri<}rrqc:q !ar: uRtl

-col-n2j.u nPcHt YSICAL COtrIFORTS .. Shouldt he ascendantto rd
be a malefic or be in the gth, 6th or f Ztn, pnyri."t
felicity will diminish. If he, r to.Hg!!$Igere wirtt e at



Chapter 12 127

all times comfortsof the bodv. If the ascendanlot rd is in
affimy'i slicgnq.,  therew tilll  bDe -e? diftfsieases.

. . . . . _ _ _
ln an an or trrne,au grseasews lll orsappeaf.

Notes : The ascendant lord going to an evil house toge-
ther with a malefici s a dire defect in the matter of not only
healthb ut also luck and progress. If the asccndanlto rd in the
processis  a benefico r is exalted, then some relief in the couree
of tirne can be hoped.

The ascendant'sangles (i.e. 4th, 7th or the 10th)or its
trine (5th/9th) containing a benefici s a powerful remedyf or all"
ills related to hellth.

irfi q?isr{r lru|E'rlsrar tt r
{E?fiERAA ir q?a}{Egda Qrrlrr

3. There will not be bodily health if the ascendanot r the
Moon b6 aspectedb y or conjunct a malefic, being devoid of a
benefic'saspcct. '

wl elrt qw: qrE ntsqffia: r
{tq€a{t l€ il'i kgwFqil: \tvtl

4. BQDILY BEAUTY .' A benefic in the ascendantw ill'
give a pleasinga ppearancew, hile a malefic will make one bereft
of good appearance,Felicity of the body will be enjoyedi f rhe
ascendantis aspectedby or conjunct a benefic.

wm al 1ttfsft {s} il *;rrlqq: r
{felgtircn qrd {fqqq <tiirqFfl$ur:{ tl
dfii qrqfdrTQ {rrq€tiltfail |
dtfa'{lqq qErdrit QetwerFrd: nqu
dq] cr't<)qil 951 qrl a;Eqqf|46; I
Rrqq t;rqal qrsfr Trcrfierqitil:u \etl

5-7. OTHER BENEFITS; If the ascendantf ord, Mercury,
Jupiter or Venus be in an angle or in a trine, the native will be
longlived, wealthy, intelligent and liked by the k.ing. Fame,
wealtb, abundant pleasures and comforts of the body will



128 Brihat parasara Hora Sastra

be aoquiredi f tho ascondant lord is in a movable sign and bc
arpectedb y a beneficp lanet. Orle will bc endowed with royal
marks (of fbrtune) if Mercury, Jupiter or Venusb o in the
ascendantalong vith the il{oon, or bc in anglc from the
&l0€ndant.

Notes : "RaJalrkshtn!" mcan$ mark of fortune. There
arc 32 Lakshanas of m{or categ,oryi n Samudrika Sastra or
physiognomy. Someo f thesc could be found in ch. 8l of our
presentw ork (vol tI).

If Mercury, Jupiter or Vcnus be in 4th, 7th or l0th from
the asoendanto, r be in the compan! of the Moon in thc ascep-
dant, the native will er{oy royal fortunes.

Rdt e3t crfq FFt ii {n $t r
il{d{raTfr qd q il* ;nq}fkt: ttqtr

8. COILED BIRTH .' If there 5e a birth in one of Aries,
Taurus and Leo ascendantscOntaining either Saturn or Mars,
the birth of the child is. with a coil around- The corresponding
limb will be in accordancew ith the Rasi or Navamsar ising.

Notes : ,This rule applies to only three ascendantsv, iz.
Aries, Taurus and Leo. Mars ot Saturn should be in the
ascendant. The limbs indicatedb y the Rasisa rOshowni n sloka
4- [ of ch. 4 supro. Theseapply to the Navamsasa r well. Thc
limbs denotedi n slokas 12-15o f' the present chapter havea
dlfferentu se and shouldn ot be mixedf or the purpcaeo f coiled
birth, which will be simply obvioust o tb6 reader.

qgtqqqd qrg: qt qliqqf.,{f,r: t
frsqqrq.rilI qrill dqf,fqR frfqia rta.rr

9. BIRTH OF TWINS .' The native, who has the Sun in
a quadrupeds ign while others are in dual signswith strength,i s
bo'rnas one of the twins.

Notes : Quadruped signsa re : Aries, Taurus, Leo, first
half of Capricorna nd second part of Sagittarids. If the Sun is
in a quadrupeds ignw hile all othersare in dual signs-Gemini
and its angles-the nativewill be one of the twins. The other
six planetsb e endowedwith strength.



Chapter 12 129

€"tr{ grrrarwritiltnrtrqtqdt r
faqmt q fefqqtii: fqat ultltt ir q]fqa: n! otl

1A. TO BE NURTURED By 3 MOTHERS ; If the Sun
and the Moon join in one and the sameb hava( house)a nd fall
in one Navamsa,t he native will be nurturedb y 3 differentm ot-
hersf or the fiirst 3 months from its birth arrdw ill later on be
broughtu p by its fatherand brother.

Notes : In my opinion, the Vargothamap ositiono f the
luminariesi n conjunctionseemsto be excepted. They shouldbe
in the sameq uarter of a constellationa nd will naturally be in
one Navamsa. This combination obviously implies loss of
motherw ithin the first threemonths.

916 apart from meaninga  brother calls for intirpretation
N a near relativei n general.

qqtq sit qtti q?ilafq Rer qd': r
3rs qrffi{€qrfr' TurrqEfrf{qqi l il11rr

1 ll. IMPO.RTAN? .. The learnedi n astrologys houtdb ase
the effectso n the Moon alsoa s are applicablet o the ascendant.
Now explaineda re clues to know of ulbers, identity marks etc.
on one'sp erson.

Notes : This wellknown rule is a specialityi n Hindu
Astrology and has the sage'ss anction. The Moon is givena 
significanst tatuse qualt o the ascendanfto r sher uleso ne'sm ind
and the mind in turn functionsa ccording to cne's'Karma, see
BuddhihK armanusarini,

f{R} ii ilcrT Fqft" {tf€* q sq}q6t I
€Ttq q FFEr€n r;trEnEtiltlqtt rrt  Rrr
qsqic$rqi ili qrvETssql  gail irqr I

, nrd q 6et *)i qrfirrifa qwrfiq{ ul1tl
diafaggA snEt qdq+r

ilrI Effi ulYrl
12-14.D ECANATES AND BODILY LIMBS.. Head,

eyes, ears, nose, temple, chin and face is the order of limbs
denoted( by the varioush ousesw) hen the first decanateo fa sign



130 Brihat ParasaraI lora Sastra
ascends.I n the caseo f the secondd ecanatea scendingt,h .is e order

: neck, shoulderna rm, side, heart, stomacha nd navel. The
order for the third decanatea scendingis  : pelvis, anus/penis,
testiclest,h igh, knee, ealfa nd foot. The portion arreadyr isen
indicates left side of the body (whire the one yet to risi-i e.
invisibleh alf-denotes right sideo f the body).
. ,_ Notes : The portion that has already riseni s known as

visibleh alf of the horoscope. From the cusp of the ascenJani
to the cusp of the descendantc ountedb ackward, (i ;. 
lOth ;;il;

cusp) is visibreh arf. The rest is invisibre n"rr. visiti"
half representtsh e reft sideo f the body while invisibr"r ,arri igt t
sidcof the body.

- The limbs suggestedb y the 2 srokas in three different
orders are shown in the three diagramsf or an easygrasp. 
assumptioni 

The
s that the frst decanate,s econd decanite ana the

third dccanateo f Aries rise in the respectivec ases: 

I [**
*:' | *:"i T'T|3 *' ,,n,

e |  -J- *,,n,
I of headi  of head eY  ear

I tI _ ._
Ler t  I  r ,  
ear lR ight

| | nostril
- t  I Aries ascendant I

I
I nrst decanatc l-

L€ f t  |  ,  lR igh t
nos t r i l f  \  |  s i de

| \ | tempre

|';#



Chapter 12 t 3 l

loE,,*
Shoulder Neck Neck Shoulder

(tert) Arm
(l ert) (right) (right) (right)

Arm Right
(lert) side of

Aries ascendant trunk

Left secondd ecanate
Right

side of sideo f
trunk heart

Left side Left side Left side Right Right
of of stom- of side of side of

heart ach navel navel stomach

Left side Right Anus/
of sideo f penis

pelvis pelvis (right)

Aries ascendant
third decanate

Left Left Right
calf foot foot



132 Brihat parasora Hora Sastra
The abovet hrce diagramsa re madef or the threed ecanates

of Aries ascendant. The reader can change,t he sign positions
according to the ascendanat nd its decanatea s prevailing at
birth. The two halvesi n the ascendanta nd Zth may pleaseb e
noted attentively.

The correspondingpart for femalei s ovary as against
male'.ste sticle. Similarlyf emale'sp rivity prevailsi n exchangeo f
male organ. Pelvisi s madei nto two parts,v iz. falsep elvisa nd
true pelvis. The true pelvis is denotedb y the portion of the
zadiacy et to rise while falsep elvisb y the half of zodiaca lready
rose.

*r;r$ fsa: qrql aufa e fiqrlE{i( I
fiatf tgi: qi: driiieq q*{ Grrru:t {tl

15. LIMBS AFFECTED ; The limb relatedt o a malefic
by occupationw ill haveu lcerso r scars while the one by benefic
will have a mark (like moles etc). So say the learned( in
astrology).

Notes : Also see sloka6 , ch. 4 oi Saravati, which states
that a malefico r a benefici f be in own Rasi or Navamsa,t he
effectsw ill be right from birth, In other cases,i t will be in the
courseo f one'sl ife that thesee ffectsw ill comet o poss.

qq srq$TtEr[FTtsrlti4l :t  l tt
Chapter1 3

Effects of SecondH ouse
qqrTrqsi{ qFq TT rd Gqqf,q ! r
trivft qaqrqrer: *mlqqalsfq finttl
qqTEtrl iqRmrql qnqrfi6-( t
UEE{ir ql qlsq: qrq} uafaarnSqi lqrr

l-2. COMB|NATIONS FOR WEALTH : O exceltento f
the Brahmanas, listen to me speaking on the effectso f the 2nd



Chapter 13 133
house.I f the lord of the 2nd is in the 2nd or is in an angleor in
a trine, he will promoteo ne'sw ealth(orm onetarys tate).S hould
he be in the 6th/8th/l2th, financial conditionsw ill decline. A
benefici n the 2nd will give wealthw hile a malefic insteadw ill
destroyt he same. '

Notes : Venus or M in the 2nd will be favourablc
for e Juoiter t whol lva us.I f how-
evbr,J upiter is in the rullng aspects
will be smooth. That is why tlie sages pecificallym entionst his
fact in the next sloka' It doesn ot meant hat Jupiter, otherwise
in the 2nd will be wholly harmful. This denotesa  probremaric
situationi n money matters. various authorsh avegivend iffe-
rent viewsi n their works for a summary of which the reader
rnays witchover to p. 491o f my Englisht ranslationo f Saravali.

qilfqql g{{{q ffrrrrzrqa} qaar 
n'ttt uQa) qrlt tr?r?TrTI l; r* wiq rrlrr

3. Onew ill be wealthy if Jupiter is in the 2nd as the lord
of the 2nd or is with Mars.

Notes:  There are two independenct onditionsi n this verse
denoting wealth. Jupiter,i f in the 2nd, should be the ruler of
2nd for the native
ascentlant atrd Aquartus In that case, his

r wealth rather abundant
wealth. Whether or not Jupitero wns the 2nd, if be conjunct
Mars, wealthw ill be acquiredb y the native;t he houseo ccupied
by them not standingl br consideration.

a+li firqlrrqri qr*i elt urf qil r
ilt1q} t;EnlqsJ wr{nl q ?Tt wiq rrvrr

4. If rhe2 nd lord is in the llth whilet he lord of the llth
is in the 2nd, wealth will be acquiredb y the native. Alternat-
ively theset wo lords mayj oin in an angleor in a trine.

Notes : The llth lord hasa  say in financialm attersa part
from the 2nd lord. One'sg ainsa re indicated by the llth lord.
If he is in exchangew ith the 2nd lord, the nativew ill be wealthy,
Theset rvop lanetsjo ining in theascendant4, th,?th, l0th, 5th or
9tlt will alsol ead to financialg ains.



r34 Erthat ParasaraH ora Sastra
qlf ffi{rd qt*{i aftqn}urtr 
5e{d."{t ifi qq6Trqg{Tirqr rrr

5. If the lord of the 2nd is in an angrew hile the lrth lord
is in a trine thereofo r is aspectedb y or conjunct by Jupitera nd
Venus,t he supjectw ill be wealthy.

Notes : The lord of the 2nd should be in the ascendant,
or 4thlTthll0th house. llhe ilth lord shouldb e in the sthlgth
countedf rom the houseo ccupiedb y the 2nd lord. Alternatiwty
the 2nd lord should be related to Jupiter (and)o r V.nu, UV
conjunction or by aspect. Both the combinationsa re f";
gainingw ealth.

ui{il frgwnr* crinraqrrdf qfqr 
qiul qrq$ill ?n IGal GTFiig rr(;1qll
urrF[rrTr{irtntTtift qFtqt(qFqa't I
wwqfaeftrd frqr;t' qq* i(: lt\etl

6-7. YOGAS FOR pOyERTy : One wifl be pennitessif 
the lord of the 2nd is in an evil housew hile the ilth iord is also
so placed and the 2nd is occupiedb y a malefic. Therew iil be
penury right from birth and the nativew iil havet o begevenf or
bis food if the lords of the 2nd and the llth are botli combust
or be with malefics.

Notes : The lords of itre 2na and llth carrb e jointly in
the 6th18th/t2rho r individua[yd isposedi n any two of the said
three houses.S imultaneouslyt he ind house needsa  malefici n
it. Thus there are affiictions fron three directionsw hich will
make the native extremely poor. Even foo'd is denied to one
havingcombust2 nd lord and combust I lth lord. atternaiivetf
the 2nd lord may be with a severem areficw hire the ilth;;Jl;
also similarlyplaced. The conjunction of the 2nd lord with a
Yogakarka,a hhough a malefic, wiil not bc adverse in the
matter of finacb. On the-c ontrary it will prove very auspicious.
For example,M ercury, the 2nd lord, ioining Saturn io tn. 
of a Taurus cas.

n ative, will make financiai prori..t, superior.

crisc8t €qt qrsfq qqqpilfqql qf{ r
ilr* S* qi q|R qraRuirq ErtHzr:n qtl



Chapter 13 i35
8. IO.S,SOF WEALTH THROAGH THE KING .. Should

the lords of the 2nd and llth be relegatedto  the 6th/Sthltath
(jointly or separatelyw) hile Mars is in the llth and Rahu isin
the 2nd, the native will lose his wealth on account of royal
punishments.

Notes : This combination will cause financial losses
through penaltiesf,i nese tc. imposedby the government,i n the
nnodern context. Monetary deficiencieswill as well persist
throughout.

iili dtn qi vr* q.ii quig* r
.qi q qudgril qffii qiqq: uetl

9. EXPENSESON GOODACCOUNTS..J upiter inthe
llth, Venusi n the 2nd,and a benefici n the l2th while the 2nd
lord is conjunct a benefic therewill be expenseosn  religiouso r
charitableg rounds.

sqrr}tart q{rdt{i qRFF} qq*qr: r
qqlw'rtt reqm{irf qiq} feqgqq ! uqorr

10. FAME ETC, : If the 2nd lord is in own sign or is
exaltedt he nativewill look after his people,w ill help othersa nd
will becomefamous.

Notes : Our text requirest he 2nd lord to be in exaltation
or in own sign so that the nativew ill look after his people&  C.

It has been practically seen that the 2nd lord's dignity is
essentiafl or one to be helpful to others and be dutiful towards
his family membersC. haukhambae dition has almosta different
condition in this place : It statest hat the 2nd lord shouldb e in
deep exaltation or in own sign and be in aspectt o Jupiter. The
net resultg iven therein is "fame and liked bypall". The condi-
tion of 'deep' exaltation seemsto me to be somewhaitn excess
of the requirementw hile a simple own sign positioni s givena s
an alternative. As such,I  feel mereexaltationo f the 2nd lord is
cnoughf or obtainingt he saidr esults.

ftqil qr<raniwal qifr gniqt r
\ G

il(tt q{wqkfqilssqrila qrqt rri t rr



136 Erlhat PorasaraHora Sastra

ll. EFFORTLESS ACQUISITIOI{ : If the 2nd lord is
conjuncta  beneficand be in a good division like Paravatamsa,
therew ill be all kinds of wealthi n his family effortlessly.

Notes : "Paravatamsa"d enotess ix good Vargaso ut of
Dasavargas cheme( videc h.6, supra)." Paravatamsadauo" f the
text denotesP aravatao r suchother higher Vargas. To wit, the
2nd lord shouldbe in Paravatamsoar  in DevalokatnsaB, rahma-
lokamsa, Sakravahanamsoar Sridhamamsai n the Dasavarga
scheine. The eorrespondings uperior Amsaswhcm the entire
Shodasavargas chemeis usedshould be above Poornachandr-
amsa. In the Dasavargascheme,w hy the sage fixest he mini-
mum Vargaas Paravathais obvious. This vargadenotes6  good
divisions in Dasavargascheme i.e. above 50f of good
divisions.

The 2nd lord beingendowedw ith sucha  Vargad ignitya nd
conjuncta notherbeneficb rings in effortlessw calthand wealth
of all kinds. It follows that the 2nd lord's disposition (or the
dispositiono f Jupiter)w ill decidet he financialstatuso f a native.

ti{i aaiglt n}rtiln} qirqq: t
q6Er€q?qqTqs  +?irea<q niq rrlqrr

12. EYES .' If the 2nd lord is endowedw ith strength,t he
nativew ill possessb eautifuleyes. Should the saidp lanetb e in
the 6th,8th or l2th, therewill bed iseasoer  deformityo f eyes.

Notes .' "Netresa" denotest he lord of the 2nd, i.e. signifi-
cator of eyes.This doesn ot meant hat the l2th lord hasnothittg
to do with eyes. Preciscly,2nd lord and l2th lord respectively
lord over right eyeand left eyer espectively. This is from the
health point of view of eye. However,w hen the beautyof the
oyesi s to be known, it is from the 2nd houseonly. Jupiter
well placed ih the 2nd, or the 2nd lord in exaltation,or
with a beneficwill give one beautifuleyes. While Venus in the
2nd or Full Moon in the 2nd will not depriveo ne of beautiful
eyes,d efectsbf sight at an early stagewill result from the said
position. Mercury in the 2nd will havea  say on the speech
rathert han on the sight. HenceJupter's positioni n the 2nd is
a safe bet for strong sight and beautyo f the eyes,i f the planet
is not with evils of fall and the like.



Chapter 14 r37
\ \

u{qI nndg* qi flqqqR r
fqndsqiqqrdl ?t qrae{TfirqqG<arr:1  1r t 

13. UNTRUTHFUL PERSON .. If the 2nd house and its
lord are conjunct maleficst,h e nativewill be a tale-bearerw, ill
speakuntruth and will be affiictedb y windy diseases.

Notes : Tlre 2nd house and its lord are ,referred in the
matterof windy diseases.Gastric troubles, rheumatism and
the like are classifiedu nderwindy disorders. If the 2nd house
or its lord is associatedwith Saturno r Mercury it will cause
rheumatisma nd suchother disorders. If Jupiteri n affiictioni s
so related,g astrict roubleswill comet o pass.

srqTg €cTq{TE[E6FTlnru[T t qv:  l l
Cbapterl 4

EffectsO f The Third House
srarf qrq$Trqrq$ d ?raqtft q't fae ! r
q€t elralgsi srrqrTr1fq nqlr(: ut tl

l. O Brahmin,I  now tell you aboutt he 3rd house.S hould
the 3rd housebe conjunct or aspectedb y a benefic, the native
will be endowedwith.co-borna nd be courageous.

Notes : 'Bhratru' in Sanskrit simply means a brother.
Proper adjectivei s to be added, riiz. Jyeshtof or elder and
Kanishta for younger, to the word Bhratru. The 3rd house
spccificallyd ealswith the after-bornw hile the I I th housedeals
with preborn. This can be seep from sloka 32, Ch. 32 infra.
In the said chapter the sage instructsu s to considerMars for
the 3rd bhavaa nd Jupiterf or I lth bhava,

Youngers isteri s denotedb y the 3rd housea nd Mars wbile
eldersisterby the llth houseand Jupiter.



138 Brihat ParasaraH ora Sastra
q-q'tql qrqqri{fr srrEqrt qqwrfr| 
uqrierral Ersfqq qqri fqfrmE rrtrr

2. If the 3rd lord along with Mars aspectst he 3rd house
the nativew ill enjoy good resultsd ue to the 3rd house.A lterna-
tively theset wo planetsm ay be in the 3rd itself.

Notes : Mars alonei n the 3rd, excepti n Capricorn or in
Scorpio or in Arics, is not conductivet o brothers. The form of
our slokai s differenti n that the 3rd houseb e jointly aspectedo r
occupiedb y Mars and the 3rd lord for the prosperityo f coborn.

qrqqlir r1 qlqai"qlti qT gir: r
siitiErt fr(qq qql fqEa rfra irrc: rrlrr

3. Destructiona t onceo f coborn will comet o passi f the
said 2 planetsa re togctherw ith a malefico r in a signo wnedb y
a malcfic.

Notes:  "The coborn will not live long" is the hint givenb y
the phrase" Sadyon ihantarau". Mars and the 3rd lord joining
in a malefic's sign or joining a malefic is said to be adversefo r
the longevityof coborn. Similarly Jupitera nd the I lth lord in
sucha statei s adversefo r elderb rothersa nd elders isters;V cnus
and the 7th lord so placed for the spouse,J upitera nd the 5th
lord so placedf or progeny; Sunand the 9th lord so placedf or
father,t he Moon and the 4th lord so placedf or mother,and so
on and so forth. So to sry the significatora nd the lord of the
concernedhouset ogetheri n a malefic's sign or with a malefic
(or in an evil house)w ill bring harm to the saidrelative.

e*rql Hracrin: r{tuq} $ni!fl?rr:I 
qf{i} TnE r{r qlilr tltiaq}aftrrvrr
fq{ fqsrqcf Erid qiltqqfqf{qiqm r

4-4t. FEMALE AND MALE COBORN .' If the 3rd lord
is a female planeto r if the 3rd house be occupied by female
planets, one will havesisters born after him. Similarly male
planetsa nd male signsd enotey ou.ngerb rothers.Shouldi t be of
mixed nature, coborn of both sexes will be obtained. These
effectsb e declareda fter assessintgh e strength and weaknesso f
the concerned.



Chapter 14 t39
Notes : Saturna nd Mercurya re termeda s neutralp lanets.

Rahu and Ketu are shadowyo nes. In the mattero f deciding
the sexo fcoborn or progeny, Saturna nd Rahu be treated as
malesw hile Mercury and Ketu are females.

(Trailokyapraknsikav ide sloka l2 treatsK etu as a female
and Rahuas aeunuch. Daivagnabharanvaid e ch, I, s. 14-15
considersthe reverseo f this at one place and imediately quotes
a differents ihool of thought. thus : Rahu is a malep i"nrt uod
Ketu a eunuch.)

All odd signsa re malesigns and all evensignsa re female
signs.M ale signsexclusivelyo ccupiedb y malep lanetsw ill cause
birth of brothers. Converseis  the casew ith females ignso ccu-
pied by female planets. This should be known from the 3;d
house being male or female sign& C. If the 3rd housei s
occupiedb y a malep laneta s well as a female planet,t here will
be brothers and sistersa s well. The contributionw ill come to
passi f the contributor is strong.F or example,J upiteri n the 3rd
in a males igni f strongw ill causet he birth of a brother.I f he is
weak,acquisitiono f brother through Jupitrr will not be fruitful.
Then one hast o look uptoa lternatives ourcesw hethert he native
will havea  brother or not.

q* gqqdtnqft aqlat|lmnrl n{tl
*afhftri qTsfq sftqfqxqqft r
6r* (€td n qqtk{ fsfrfil( rrqrr

5-6. Should the 3rd lord and Mars be togetheri n the gth,
destruction of coborn will result. Happinessi n this respect
will come to pass if Mars or the 3rd lord is in an angleo r in a
trine or in exaltation/friendlyd ivisions.

Notes : The suggestionsgiven in the notes for sloka 3
about spouse,elder brother, mother etc. may be suitably
extendedin  this respectwith the help of the presentv erse. For
example, if Venus and 7th lord are together in the gth, the
native'smarriedl ife will be short (and in bad taste.)

Similarly, their conjunction in an angle or in a trine will
confer longlastingbeneficeffects.

Further hint that can be taken from the versei n question
is : If a significator and housel ord join togetheri n a sign which
is identical with debilitation/inimical sign for one of them" the



t40 Brihat Parasaraf iora Sastrd

significanceo f the planet is lost. If they join in a signwhich is
exaltation/friendlys ign for one of tbem,t hen the significanceo f
the planetg ainsp rosperity.

qqri guiy* il{tfr q:a{rqt I
firt* ffqqqqfr cfq;hTqal qqit  l le l l
q{qq e6}ar}sc}rrqdtqrgI d} rriq t
$rc* {r6{i{{t qQ..lfr g {tqt ttctt
q{qlE ''rqlarivd R{ g ai?d se( r
qrq(?rr{TfirE*' ri 6Kt aqfet}wt rterr
dtiq ql€e qla* frqt arcn qlqlr: t
.tr ctaaari ailcETrfiftI;it qdtamni l!oll
qcflTi itlri iq nEd s ttf etq t
dqt: e6tart: qq * u{lfftidfan: llt tll

7-ll. NUMBER OF BROTIIERSA ND SISIfRS ; If
Mercuryi s in thc 3rd whilet hc 3rd lord and Moon are together
as thc indicttor (Mars) joins Saturn, the cffects are : there
occurredth ebirth of an elder sistera nd therew ill be youngcr
brothersF. urthert he third brother will die' ShouldM ars and
Rahubeconjunctw hilet he 3rd lord is in his signo f debilitation'
there will be losso f youngcr brothers/sisterws hile 3 elder
brothers/sistewrse rea ttaincdb y the native. Jf the 3rd lord is in
an anglew hile the significatoirs  exaltedi n a trine and be in the
companyo f Jupiter, l2 will be the numberof total coborn. Out
of these2  eldersa nd the 3rd, 7th, 9th and l2th of younger
coborn will be shortlived while six of the said twelvewill be
longlived.

Notes : The word 'Karaka' or significatorin  sloka7 etc.
shouldbe wiselyn otedas Mars only and not as Jupiter,which
is borneb y slokaI  l.

In the contexto f indication of one'o having1 2 coborn,
this may be taken in the presenat ge to be a numberof coborn,
if not literally 12. Mars exalted and being in the companyo f
Jupiteri s denoted which meansJ upiterw ill be in fall. Someof
the coborn will die obviously becauseo f Jupiter's debilitatioa
taking aways omep otenceo f exaltedM ars.



Chapter1 4 14t
aqi*r {il} q.tq} yvrr ufqa}sfqq r r
qnqri frqt ffi q.aqauregvleru: tqrr
tnqwr* nfvrlt +ild gv.aQ{arfr 
FEvr *rmrl *qr: gngeilfails;qqplt 'lll

l2-13. Tberew ill be 7 coborni f the l2th lord (somet exts
reada s the llth lord) joins Mars and Jupitcrw hilet he 3rd is
occupiedb y the Moon. If the Moon is loncly placedi n the 3rd
in aspect to male planets, therew ill be youngerb rothersw hile
the aspecto f Venusd enotesy oungers isters.

oti ilif {fqtFil lst qrd fliqqq: r
srTaI tT66!f {fq t6werr} q{rgil: ulvtl

14. ADVERSE PLANEZ,S:  The Sun in the 3rd will
destroyt hc prehorn. The afterborn will be destroyedi f Saturn
is found in rhe 3rd. In the same situationMars will destroy
both the preborna nd later born.

Notes : Sage Bhrigu alsoopines that the Sun in the 3rd
house will not allow the nativet o retain his elder brothers.
This position will affect one'sr elationship with brothers and
sisters. Regarding Mars in the 3rd, Garga Maharshi states
that the nativew ill obtain two brothersa nd two sistersa ll the 4
of whom will pass awaye arly. The placemento f Mars in the
3rd hasalsoa dverses ay on the native's character. For further
details,s eem y detailed notesi n the chapter. ,Effectso f planets
in Bhavas",o f Saravali.

qiqt fqq ! qlqni qanqfqfaotqrar 
wquri qfrr{tqi {T qrerrq uvaiqultrr

15. After estimating the strength and weaknesso f such
yogas,t he effectsr elatedt o brothersa nd sistersb e announced.



qeT( tKililIeilFciluutllt: ff l{ l l
Chapter1 5

EffectsOf The Fourth House
glit tiilqqEl(4 qi{ daiT& qrn I
gqqrilfiq glsq mqqfq faqltrq ! ulrr

l. O excellentof the Brahminst,h us haveb eenb riefly told
about the effects of the 3rd house. Now listent o tlie results
relatedt o the 4th housc.

g(iri UqwrqrQ qrii il{qesfq ril |
q!q*i q afiertlr {qff TEgq a\ rrlrr

2. HOUSING COMFORTS.. One wilt have residential
comfortsi n full degreeif  the 4th is occupied by its lord or by
the ascendanlto rd and be aspectedb y a benefic.

sQ rEi{It €ql"i gqrqrilfqfr qf{ |
qft-an-gr{hi gd qT€rqt d{nu ttl

3. MISCELLANEOUS.. Shouldt he 5th lord be in his own
house,o r in own Navamsao r in exaltation, the nativew ill be
endowed with comfortsr elatcd to lands, conveyancesh,o uses

etc. and musicali nstruments.

q'qffqta iXei *;s' FIA
. 1qrfuQr  

fqfqaslunrnrt{fiEd il{Tq q+(r rvrr
4. HOUSING COMFORTS .. If the t0th lord joins the

4th lord in an angleor in a trine, the nativew ill acquireb eauti-
ful mansions.

mqelrM qlrt {qr6{eftri I
{rfkn araigd ffs{gsh li+at rrrrr

5. RELATIVES .. Should Mercury be in the ascendant
while the 4th lord beinga  beneficis  aspectedb y anotherb enefic,
the native will be honoured by his relatives.



Chapter 15
143

, qrg:Tqri {qti il*{i r*;vtrpn1 ,
t,tr* evdgei tgfiefXnfaliq rrqrr

6. LO|{G-LIVING MOTHER I If the 4th house 
pied is occu-.

by a beneficw hile its lord is in his exaltation sign 
indicator ;;;Jtt

o 
-

f mother is 
a long-living _e ndowedw ith strength, tt, ouiiu, 

have m other.
Notes : The stronger among the Moon and Mars 

denoted is
a s the significatoro f mothir, vide srokasr &rg 

infra.There are stiil manym ore viewsa bout the karakat"wi.a-gs
parents io2 il

g ivenb y variousa uthors.

g€t iramaci irT €r *;,cftual r11:r 
{rf{rQ* q<tf qrg: Hotq <ra '\ rrurr

7. HAPPIN.ESS TO MOTHER.. The native,s mother
will be happy if the 4th lord is in an angle while venus is atso in
an angle as Mercury is exalted.

g<{ qRti qt q?i warrri sfr r
qNRErFrqr)f tfr l|}-n{@eilT[( netl

8, QaADRaPED,S .. The Sun in the 4th, Moor: and
Saturn in the 9th and Mars in the llth_this yoga will confei
cows and buffaloeso n the native.

qdQsqqqi gd anfnmq*'r
qrB qi fwi qll rq: srrdlfr qqi-f,q ilQ.tl

9. DUMBNESS .. Shouldt he 4th houseb e a movableo ne
while its rord and Mars are togetheri n the 6th or the gth house,
the native will be dumb.

qr{F{rdfrfqi 
' Hlr} gdri ;f}r<rfvrt r

{r<t qqqrq*t gdrfr qrwngi ||  I ot l
nq{i qiat n d qr$€q gq 
*-d qfi3ti Tqt€ aqqn{"rqa+q, ut  trr
rJT'r rigri qf aTfffi nE;i €q r
sfrii x1 q?qili gkilriti utRrr



144 Brihat ParasaraH ora Sastra

faqeqrtt{Tt q{ anrtl ql6;rm{ q\ r
qrid gw<rflw'Q gQ{i omig* uqiu
ari{i qeqi qr.t wnl er6uq ulq r
qd {qA rflrtFtt qrqd t6ntqiqqri l tYtl

10-14.C ONVEYANCES. ' If the ascendanltord is a bene-
fic while the 4th lord is in fall or in the llth and the significator
(Venus)i s in the l2th, thenative will obtain conveyanceins his
l2th year. Shouldt he Sunb e in the 4th house,a st he 4th lord
is exaltedand be with Venus,o newill acquireconveyaneeins his
32nd year. It will be in the 42nd yeart hat one will be endowed
with conveyanceisf  the 4th lord joins the l0th lord in bis (4th
Iord's) exaltation Navamsa. Anexchange between the llth
and the 4th lords will conferconveyanceisn  the l2th year. A
beneficr elatedt o the 4th house( andt o its lord) will bring with
him auspiciouseffectsw hile a maleficw ill produceo nly malefic
effects( in respecto f conveyances).

Notes : It is not known why the 4th lord shouldb e in fall
for early obtainment of conveyances.T his conditionseemsto
be the resulto f defectivet ext as the next line addst hat the 4th
lord may be in the llth. To me it occurst hat the correct ver-
sion shouldr eada s : If the ascendanlto rd is a beneficwhile the
llth is tenantedb y Venus and the 4th lord, early obtainmento f
conveyanc(ea roundt he l2th year)w ill come to pass. Another
rule given by the sage to get similar effecti s an exchange
betweenth e lord of 4th and l lth.

Shoulda  beneficb e in the 4th, aspect he 4th, or is con-
junci with or aspect hc lord of the 4th houie, then the native
will be happyw ith conveyanccasnd be free liom accidentsa nd
dangers. A malefic replacingt he saidb enefic will causelosses
concerningv ehiclesa nd reduceone to severea ccidents.

Dear  Raader ,
We are g lad you a l :e  readlng
th t s  Un lque  Book .Some  c l t he r
rema ln l ng  chap te r s ,  wh t ch
con ta ln  ve ' ! " y  l npo r tan t
ma te r l a l , a re  g l ven  l n  1 t s
f l nd  Par t .  P lease  wr l t e
fo r  y r :u r  copy  o f  t he  s?m€c

RAI'IJAN FJBLICATIONS
1 6 ^  Ans ar t  I ln  ad -  T)ar"ve G en l  ^



0tsTr{=qr[rl lqlhq IEqrr[:il  t ql I
C-hapte1r 6

Effects Of The Fifth House
sr{r q=qqflT€q tqqrfq m{ Gq ! t
q'aQ gawraei g.dt it qt ffi ttttt
*;rfqnlqrird .il [0I g"td qaEt 
quarueqqq{t FilCtqi cfg?tTtu lll
gt{iciqfr qrfr qttrT{F} Er fini*r
aili wrail gel qrtr {r Frle %q{ ltltl

1-3. O Brahmin, now I tell you the effectsr elatedt o the
5th house.I f the lords of the ascendanat nd the 5th are in their
own signso r in an angleo r in a trine, one will enjoyt horough
happinesst hrough his children. Should the 5th lord be in the
6th, Sttto r l2th, there will be no offspring, Shouldt he lord of
tbe 5th be combusto r be with'malefics and be weak, there will
be no children; eveni f per chance issuesa re obtainedt hey will
only quit the world soon.
. Notes : "Suta" in Sanskritu sedi n compoundw ord or ag
an adjectived oesn ot excludea  femalei ssuef or it means" bego'
tten". Thereare howevers pecifico ccasionsw heret he expression
"son" is exclusivelyd enoted by this tgrm. A logical approach
accordingt o circumstanceis neededin  interpretings uchexpress-
tons.

The conjunctiono f the 5th lord with thc ascendanlot rd in
a good house will ensureearly obtainment of children apart
from happinesst hrough them. If they join in an evil house,
they will prove a defecti n this respect.

q66€Eri {nrdlr} Fr,iqi rq3ti I
ffi gqqrT?ri rn"trfiqFaql tlqfi trvrt

4. If the 5th lord is in the 6th as the ascendaolot rd is con'
' junct Mars, the nativewilt loseh is very first child whereafterh is
femalew ill not be fertile to yield an offspring.



t46 Brihat ParosaraH ora Sastra

Wrrit{r} Q {faw} 6qrrq6dr6eqRqr a: 
fim.r?saT q?rqdt gi *fiErl qfe nul

5. Shouldt he 5th lord be in fall in the 6tb, grh or the t2th
while Mercury and Ketu are in the 5th, thc dative's wife will
give birth to one child only.

qinl alqdl .rrT {iltrrn r q{qfr I
ae dftlql qni fiFfiirFeqriwrrtxTlrq(t l

6. Ifthe Sthl ord is in fa[ and be not in aspect o trre 5th
while saturn and Mercury are in the 5th, the nativc'sw ife will
give birth to one child only.

qrlnl {fffifi iq qin} {tarr} afa I
gi tqqul rnei gtf Fraq fafaf<iq rrurr

7. Shouldt he 9th lord be in the ascendantw hile the 5th
lord is in fall and Ketu is in the 5th along with Mercury,o btain-
ment of progenyw ill be after a greatd eal of ordalium.

Notes:  The very presenceo f Mercury, or Ketu, or Saturn
in the Sthwill presenta  doubtful picture of progeny. If two of
themj oin in the 5th, then therew ill be KakavandhyaD osha
(obtainingo nly a singlei ssue)fo r the wife of the native,o r evcn
childlcssness

qeaGeqazrqrq)q r ftql qr {I"(|fqm: r
gvrla qi ara sceq g{ frfrfEd( ucrr

8. If the 5rh lord is in the 6tb, gth or the l2th or be inan
inirnicals ignor t'r: in fall or in the sth itself,t he nativew ill beget
issueswith difficulty.

g"qd {qdi ffEd*sqqr gr: I
qA qTfr{qfi E€ ilitT ?titli[{: rRrt: ilQ.tl

9. Shouldt he 5th houseb e ownedb y Saturno r Mercury
and be occupiedo r aspectedb y sdturn and Mandi, one will have
adoptedi ssues.

Notes:  "Mandi,' is the word usedi n the text which means
Gulika. This identicarityh as beenn arratedi n aprevious chapter.



Chapter 16 t47

Aspecto f Mandi is suggestedb y the sage. Though there is no
authentic information on aspect of Mandi (and other Upagra-
has),i t may be said that it aspectsth c 7th house.

The rule as per the sloka applies to Aquarius, Taurus,
Virgo'andlibra. In the case of the latter two Lagnas, Saturn
though rules the 5th is hetpless obviously becauseo f afriction
by Gulika. Otherwise Saturn related to the 5th houseas its
owner will not depriveo ne of progeny'makingh im go in for an
adoption.

rfq-q.d q,irrqrHq|firqFq* t
fanqhwl rnal fafqarsRq  dfqa: llloll

10. Should the Suna nd the Moon be togetheri n a Rasi
bnd in the sameN avamsa, the native will be brought up by 3
mothers or 2 fathers.

Notes : The luminaries should be in the same Rasi and
sameN avamsa. As a result of this yoga, the child will bc

brou-pgahtteurpnably 3 femalesequa l tomotheror twomenasfa ther
(i.e. reativese tc.). This obviouslyh ints at'the possible
loss of mother or father soon after birth'

q-sqt qsJtt{A c{t{i s{r<rFnIn 
v,iir6 ircIEqJ q ma qflq3\qq: llt lll

I l. Adopted issuei s indicated if the 5th is tenanted by
six planetsw hile its lord is in the l2th, and the Moon and
ascendanat re endowedw ith sfrength

Trt rdlq{r*€ *6<qq\{H1 |
qqFf, it6.q: g"I: giti A EqIft{A ll t lll

12. There will be many children if the 5th lord is strong
while the Sth is aspected by strong Mercury, Jupiter and
Venus.

f . *tgtf*a' is another eadingw hichi ncludesp laoemenint  the

5th.



148 Brinat ParasaraH ora Sastra

qntfr qari{€ cEiwwrrrisfr il t
iT<t e mqrffi: sqt{ ief<;d6:lttlu

13. If the 5th lord is with the Moon or be in her decanate,
thc native will bcget daughters,s o say astrologers.

Notes : The 5th lord's joining rhe Moon will confer daugh-
ters (rather more daughters) than sons. The Moon is a planet
of multiplicity and hencet here will be a number of daughters.

An alternative suggestedb y the sagei s that the 5th lord
chould be in a decanateowned by the Moon. The Morn's decan-
ates are : the first tcn degreeso f C-ancert,h e secondt en degrees
ofPiscesand the third ten degreesof Scorpio. If the 5th lord
occupieea  degreca s above,he will fall in the Moon's decanate,
Then thc nativc will obtain daughters.

qin qwfit?i trgln (Qn fsql r
glrqrf ni rn q<cnii rtfrqqq ut ytl

14. If thc 5th lord ie in a movablesign while Saturn is in
thc 5th, as Rahu is with the Moon the child (so born) is of
qucctionable birth.

Notes : Therc are 3 conditionsd enoted so that the owner
of the horoscopei e an illegal product. Theseare : (a) The 5th
lord ohouldb e in a movable sign. (b) The 5th house should be
occupiedb y Saturn, and (c) The Moon should be with Rahu
(anywhere).

The combinations indicating illegal birth get nullified
under certain conditions. For details seep . 55 of my English
translation of llonsara also.

q|llr{Ggrri qd tFilT{rErti 
qqrt{i {r} r

$ Rqrdl ? iqtlt: rrt trr
15. undoubtedryt hen ativei s born of other'sr oinsif  the

Moon is in the 8th from thea scendanwth ile Jupiteri s in the gth
from thc Moon. Malefic's aspect/associatiolns  essentiatin 
this Yoga.

gdflrrtTfqf ff q.?ttt Ef"6lrni I
grdn eqi TEi glqrqgqfr R: nt qtl



Chapter 16 t49

16. If the sth lord is exaltedor be in the 2nd, 5th or 9tb
from the ascendanot r be conjunct or aspectedb y Jupiter, obtain-
ment of childrenw ill be there.

Notes : Anyone of the following 3 states of thc"Sth lord
will ensureb irth of children :

1. The 5th lord in exaltation
2. The 5th lord in the 2ndl5th/9thh ouse.
3. The 5th lord relatedt o Jupiter by aspecto r conjunction.
Event hough Jupiter may be the ruler of the 6th or 8th or

l2tb, his associationw ith the 5th lord will ensureobtainment of
children.

&ag:rrtiali qA ffiqqfqi t
ti{i {tq<rflret ;ilqi€d riftqq: utsrl

17. One will obtain children that will indulge in mean
deedsi f the 5th is occupiedby 3 or 4 maleficsw hile the Sth lord
is in fall. A benefic (including Mercury) in the 5th is excluded
ln the saidcombination.

g?€eilrI Tri sftn a*{i lgRti I
aftqi ,ir q?qi $ftrqq: lllell

"qtteri 
18. If the 5th is occupied by Jupiter while its lord is with

Venus,o ne will obtain an offspring in hip 32nd/33rdy ear.

ren imqrt€A ;Trtq mF?i r
qa.t"rit ffi q !"'lgftrfqfrffiE nterr

19. Should the 5th lord be in an anglealong with Jupiter,
the Karaka, one will begeta  child at the age of 30 or 36.

tn?r{ firqqi dti dtq qrq{i !.rl I
mlt !gt{t il ?f{rf<rl $f qt{ rrRorr

20. If Jupiter is in the 9th from the ascendanwt hile Venus
is in the 9th from Jupiter along with the ascendanltord, one will
begeta child at the age of40.



lJO BrihatP arasarali ora Sastn

g?Tqrt qi <td il{t{i weiq* r
*qrrf{rqdt dtil artH gr{itq: nRt  tl

2t. The nativewill at the ageof 32 losehisc hild if Rahu
is in the sth, the 5th lord is conjuncta malefica nd Jupiteri s in
debiItation.

dtqlE qsqqi qri RrrrE q=qqisfq q r
aqtari q ?qtirqi iriqrf{i gaqq: llRRtl

22. There will be lossof childrena t 33 and 36 if a malefic
is in qhe5 th from Jupiter while anotheri s in the 5th from the
ascendant.

f,ri nFaarrXli qrit rftqqfni r
qassqmil*sE'l q ge{r}fi€qEq: ulltl

23. ShouldM andi bb in the ascendanwt hile the ascendant
iord is in fall, grief on account of losso f child at the ageof 56
will comet o pass.

Notes:  Mandi and Gulika are onc and the samea s
describeds upra.The placemenot f Gulika in the ascendanwt hile
its lord is in dcbilitation will cause deatho f an offspringa t the
native's agc of 56. Similarly,t he debilitation of Gulika's
dispositorw ill causeharm to the bhavac oncernedi,. e. the bhava

, occupiedb y Gulika.

qg{ nniXrR q66qt{ 6iq Q r
qei q(f,rqsi ilr*dr HqfiTi uRvtl
r6r(t {qqi <niearcg q?{: I
qtrlcqri Efl+ uii n6d3i ui{u
qrhi wrqitqi iqqrei ;GT ffTe: r
g?qTq{A ' ili qili eadgi n1r,tl
qi{i qfqTqrt qqiaqtrg qnq: I
qsqqq q=ql ll;i qrcQ q ilEt{qi ilR\etl
qtq: qtdi(q{q Gqd qqql q\ r
fq*{i rTsirqTqrl qmQ q qilleri ttRctl



Chapter 16 l5 t

qTqri qE {in€rs.r iei q FaiwqPcr: 
lrFqq q=qqi fi dtq q:qqri wql trqe.rr
qnt wri1li g*d ftfaf+R r
q=irt w1li qr EilqrEq sqni n-qlt tlorr
rliiltiftT grqr{ $il"eqqF! qir(
q=q* tnq€.q\qil citerq q=arri {ril i l l I  r l
q'ti EIi$lr{[T;T qtnl nlq{Xs;g 
ild qd f*r{i€tn* afgn eni u\ rr11rr

24-32. NUMBER OF CHILDREN .' There will be l0 sons
if the 4th and the 6th are occupied by malefics while the 5th
lord is in deep exaltationj oining the ascendanlto rd as Jupiter is
with another benefic. Nine will be the number of sons that one
wilt beget if Jupiter is in deep exaltation as Rahu is with the
2nd lord and the 9th is occupiedb y its own lord. Therew ill be
eight sonsi f Jupiteri s in the 5th/9th while the 5th lord is endo-
wed with strengtha nd the 2nd lord is in the l0th. Saturni n the
9th from fhe ascendantw hile the 5th lord is in the 5th itself,
will give 7 sons out of which twins will be born twice. If the
5th lord in the 5th ih conjunction with the 2nd lord, there
will be birth of 7 sons out of which 3 will passa way. Only one
son is denoted if thereb e a malefici n the 5th from the ascen-
dant while Jupiter is in the sth from Saturnot vicev ersa, If
the 5th househ asa  malefic in it or if Saturni s in the 5th from
Jupiter, the native will begeto ffspring only throughh is 2nd or
3rd wife. Shouldt he 5th beoccupiedby a maleficwhile Jupiter
has Saturn in the 5th as the ascendant lord is in the 2nd, and
the 5th lord is with Mars, one will live long but loseh is children
one after the other as they are born.

Dear Raader ,

r i le  are g lad you are readlng th ls  Unlque Book.
3one  o the r '  r ema ln l ng  chap te r s ,wh l ch  con ta l n  ve
lmp ro r t an t  maLe r l a l , a re  g l ven  1n  1 f s  f f nd  Pa f t .
P lease  wr l t e  f o r  yon r  copy  o f  t he  same.

RANJAN PUB LICAI IOI{S
' t A  A n o ^ r {  E t . . ^ A  l - l ^ F r r a  d a n {



SIetr r66$ttEt'sqpqllt:lt  t ell
Chepter1 7

Effects Of The Sixth House
qq frr I qd qei qraqrqe{iq?r{ |
tt rtqeqni q TqilItoidtm rrtrr

. 1. O Brahmin, followingare the effects producedb y tho
6th house,r elating to diseases,u lcers etc. Listen to the same
attentively.

. rrcatfur: rerfr[ il Q ilstqce* ftqa: t
r{t qufr qr{t qradqrtqrfqi rrlrr

2. ULCERSIBRUISES. ' Should the 6rh lord be in the
6th itself or in the ascendant/8th,t here will be ulcerso r bruises
on the body. The sigo becomingt he 6th housew ill lead to the
lnowrcdge of the concernedl imb.

qt
mrf4{Wnqrfq q66rcaq{il qfr trlrr
ffi qli q|qilfEtq'r 1ir(}rorr r
I€ar q gQ not qlir rir arfrg rrvrr
leqt ilfqtrnt q lgqrT ml qi r
nhn rrdqt gat tgrr s irr riq utrr

. 3-5. RELATII/ES AFFECTED .. The Karaka of a rclative
or the lord of such a house joining the 6th lord or being in the
6th/8th house indicates ulcers/bruisest o such a rclative tike
father. The Sun with such lordship and in such a housc
dcnotes such affectation of head,t he Moon face,M ars neck,
Mercury navel, Jupiter nose, Venus eyes, Saturn. feet and the
aodesa bdomen.

Notes : In these three slokas, we are instructedt o know
of the possiblea ffiictionst o the natlve'sr elativesa nd to the native
bimself - both from the horoscopeof the native.



Chapter1 7 153

Firstly a certain significator or a certain bhaval ord should
join the 6th lord or be in the 6th/8th house so that the relative
signifiedb y the said Karaka incurs ulcers, bruises etc. For
erample,i n a SagittariusL agnah oroscopet,h e 6th lord is Venus.
The 6th is Taurus and the 8th is Cancer. Suppose the 4th lord
Jupiter or the Matrukaraka Moon (signifying mother) joins
Venus or is in Taurus. (Cancer though the 8th house, the
Moon thereins hould not be deemedh armful in this regard and
Jupiteri n Cancerw ill not alsoa ffict the motheras he is exalted
therea nd protLctst he 4th by aspect.)A s a result, the mother
will incur ulcer, bruisese tc.

The relatives signifiedb y planetsa nd Bhavasa re denoted
in ch, 32, infra.

The second clue is to know the possiblea ffiiction,t o the
native,o f a particularareai n the body. If the Sun is the lord of'
the 6th houseo r is with the 6th lord or is in the 6th/8th,t he
native will be apt to incur affiiction of head, dnd so on and
forth. As regards, Rahu and Ketu, they do not own any house
in the normal context. Hence their position in the 6th/8th or
goiningt he 6th lord needo nly be considered' Rahu or Ketu in
the 6th/8th will causes tomachiadl isorders'

rnrnfqq: gqqii tqt qf{ dfeqa:I 
Itlt ga ftual i< {tfi{a'l gqattlit: llqll

6. FACIAL DISEASES. ' Should the lord of the ascen-
drnt bc in a sign of Mars or of Mercury and be aspected
Merury, there will be diseaseos f the face'

Notes : The lord of the ascendant should be in Aries,
Scorpio, Gemini or Virgo and be aspectedb y Mercury. Even
lf Mars, ruling the ascendant,i s in Gemini or in Virgo and is
aspectedb y Mercury, the native will suffer facial diseases' The
occuPationc an be in anYb hava.

As regardsA ries Lagna and Scorpio Lagna a different look
be given to the placemento f Mars in own sign. For Aries Lagna,
Mars in Scorpio or for Scorpio Lagna, Mars in Aries and
aspectedb y Mercury will not produce the said adversity. unless
Man is seriouslya ffiicted otherwise.



t54 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastrd

Gcr{rtqFrerenlFsil qtturl q?rruurr qRr{ iln} r
ilEerr{ rftin wd g;uaa q fqfttE{iEl stl
qftrrRri fqar qrl ftrrniqqfl {r{it I
€agazi tTitr Scors6dir  ufqrr {T{ iletl
gla T{r$d €{riTillq franfq trc}rr

7-8t. LEPROSy.: 
.Mars or Mercuryh aving ownershipo f

the ascendings igna nd joining the Moon, R"h-" u;J il;r;:
will causele prosy.I f the Moon is in the ascendanwt hich is noi
however Cancer and be with Rahu, thcre will occurw hite
leprosy. saturn in praceo f Rahu w'r causeb rackr eprosy* nii"
Mars similarlyw ill affiict one with blood-leprosy.

aq q66r6eTr*{fftq qr qfE igcl rrtrr
atRrrw: St iliq: tR?flqqsrlq qTr 
g1l fqii gwr qlilqn faftte,iq IrI  ol l
T{lfq: q,*q, nfnar argati la} qR r
rrEs{iTr0srFrailr}*  ar:*gli qq{ uiltl
q;ao[ rruc:a fqfr:f iqfrrqilitr qir r
ttEl fqarfarrrri iliterrrqlqlrrarr:q lrr
T0d dqt atkqqrre q{}fqfq: u f Rltl

9-12|. DISEASES IN GENERAL : tf the ascendanti s
occupiedb y the lords of the 6th and gth arong with the sun, the
nativew ill be afflictedb y fever and tumours.M ars reptacinit tre
sun will causes rvelringa nd hardeningo f the brood vessels-and
Jv-o,u1dasn d hits by weapons. Mercury so featuring will brin!
in billious diseasewsh ire Jupiteri n similarc asew ilr destroya n!
disease. similarry venus wiil caused iseasesth rough femares,
Saturn windy diseases,R ahu dangert hrough foi-.artbi.i
and Ketu naveld iseasesT,h e Moon in sucha  conjunction
i f i t w n l c  ill

dangersth rough water and phregmaticd isoiderss. imilar
estimatepb e madef rom the respeitives ignificators 
for relativesli ke father. "";;;;;;;

Notes : The bints given abovec an be summed up as
under :



Chapte1r 7 155

Lordso f the 6th and8 th in theascendanbte ing
with the Sun : Tumours,f evere tc.

" Mars Diseaseso f blood vessels,
hits, woundse tc.

" Mercury Bilious disease(l ike
jaundice).

" Jupiter Freedomf rom diseases.
t' Venus Diseasecsa usedb y sexual

union.
" Saturn : Windy diseaselsik e rheu-

matism,a rtheritis,
paralysise tc.

" Rahu : Danger from the so called
Iow-castem en.

" Ketu : Diseaseso f the navel.
" the Moon : Drowning, cough,t uberculosis,

asthmaa nd other lung
disorders.

Replacing the ascendanwt ith a ceriainbhava,t heseaffiic-
tions to the concernedr elativesb e predicted. For example,i f
the 6th and 8th lordsj oin the Moon in the 3rd bhava, danger
to cobornb y drowning,l ung disorderse tc. be known. Should
Venus join the 6th and 8th lords in the I lth house; an elder
brother of the nativew ill incur venereadl iseases.

Thus the qluesg ivenb y the sages hould be extensivelya nd
cffectiv"ly applied in regard to diseasesf or the native and his
relatives.

. The affiictions to be causedb y the planets,s ignse tc. have
been rather exhaustivelyg iveni n the notesi n ch. 47 of my
English translation of Saraveli. Though it wasi n the context of
death,t he samemay be carefully used in knowing diseaseass
well. The readermay accordinglyc onsult the said Notes.

Dr. H. L. Cornell, M. D., in his 'Encyclopaediao f Medi-
cal Astrology' enlistss ome important diseasesunder different
planetaryc aptions. By way of adding useful information for
the benefitof the inquisitiver eader,I  quote someas below :

The Sun : diseaseso f the nerves of the brain, cellular
ercitation,b lood affiiction,w eakconstitution,d rynessa, poplexy,



156 Brihat parasaraE ora Saslra
diseaseso f arteries,b owel disorders,p imples,s kin and throat
alfliction, chronic inflamation, conjuctivities, diphtheria,
dizziness,d ropsy (Hindu astrology relates dropsyt o Jupiter),
fever,f istula,giddiness,g laucoma,v iolent pains and headiches,
organic heart troubles, palpitation disorders,h yperanaemia,
affiictionsto  excretorya nd generatives ystemsm, easleso, bstruct-
ion in the stomach,quinsy,s crofula, scirrvy, sharpnesosf  urine,
smallpox,d isordcrso f spine, strangury,s unstrokess,w ellingsin 
necko r feet,t remblings,t umours,venereald istemperse lc.

The Moon : gaseousd istention of abdomen, abscesses,
diseaseso f alimentary canal, disorderso f bladder, blindness,
disorderso f bowels,d isorders of the brain substanceb,r onchial
disorders, cancer, carditis, catarrh, cellularz yrnosisw, ormsi n
children, colds,conjuctivitis, rotten coughs,d elirium( Rahu is
the main planet for delirium accordingt o Hinctu astrology),
diarrhoea, irregular menses, menstrual disorders,d yspepsia,
effusions,e pilepsy, eruptions, disorderso f eyes, gout in feet,
osmosisl,e ucorrhoea,d iseaseosf  genetalsd, efectsin  haemoglo-
bin, hysteria,mentali ll health, stonei n Kidneys (alsoV enusi n-
dicatest his disorder),s crofula, disorderso f larynx,d isorderso f
breastsd, iseaseso f mucousand serousm embranesm, iscarriage.
obstruction of bowels and lungs, phthisis, prematureb irths,
profluvial effusions,t hin blood, disorderr of uterus,v omitting
etc. Shew ill also causel iver defectsfo r women( whilc Jupiter
affiictst he male'sl iver).

Mrrs : death by abortions, disorderso f varcle, bleeding,
excessivemenses,b oils, affections and pains in breasts,b urns,
bruises, carbuncles,c hickenpox, cholera,c ongertiono f blood,
consumption, contagious feyeri, cutaneous eruptionsrfatty
degenerationof the heart, dyscntery, epidomics, fracturega nd
falls, disorderso f geneto-urinarys ystem, gonorrhoea,h aemop.
tysis,hernia,hysteria,i tches,l osso f blood, homorrhageo f lungi,
.malaria (also under Rahu), ulceration of penir,p erityphlitio,
piles,s emitertiafle vers, syphilis, extremeheat in throat,t onsils,
vasculare xcitementa, bscesosf  vulva,y ellowj aundicee fc.
- Mercory 3 nervous complaints, &sthma, apoplexy,i mpurc
blood, disordersc ausedt o brain by overwork, rapid breathing,
shortnesso f breathing, colic in the bowels, crampsi n the arms,
shoulders, legsa nd feet, dumbness,f alling fits, flatulent colic,
gastro-abdominal troubles, byperasthesia,i nsomnia, neuralgia



Chapter l7 t57

in and obstructiono f kidneys, paralysis of the nervous system,
pulmonaryd iseasesq,u ivering,griplings in stomachs, uppression
of urine,heart tremours, lowering or exhaustingo f the vital
fluids of the nerves,worms in bowelselc.

Jupiter : Jupiter will not cause any diseaseb y himself
but when affiicted in the figureby adverse heavenlyb odies.
Such are : Adiposis (excessivefo rmation of adipose tissue),
disordersofadrenals, diseasesfr om corrupt air, alterations in
the red blood particles,d isorderso f arterialblood, disordersin 
the back and of backbone,s tonei n bladder,c ancero f the breast,
cerebralc ongestiond, igestived isordeis,d ropsy, affectionso f the
ear, eczema,t umour of kidneys, disturbanceso f milk glands,
fatty degenerationo f muscles,p lethoric and sthenicdistentions,
potato like cancer,t horacicd iathesisp, ainsi n vertebrae,d iseases
of viscera,l iver and spleen.

Venus : comedo, disorderso f bowels (like distempers,
flux and mucus in bowels), breathing disorders (causedb y tight
lacinga nd indiscretionsin  dress),Bright's Diseasep, oor circulat-
ion of venousb lood, cloggingof the system,disordersc ausedb y
wrong use of cosmetics,diabetes,diphtheria, enlargedt onsils,
humorousd ischargef rom eyes, skin eruptions and diseasesin 
feet,biliousf latulency,h ysteria,diseaseso f kidneys,K ing's Evil,
diseaseso f matrix, Night Losses(d ischargei n sleep),v enereal
disorders, disordersof thorax, TyphusFever, urine infection,
ctc.

Saturn : antiperistalsisa, rthritis, articular rheumatism,
blackj aundice, fractures of and painsi n bones,c hronic bron-
chitis, impotence,c lub feet,c olds, deafnessd, yspnoeat,yphoid,
disorderso f foetusand troublesduring conception,narrowing
of passagesh eart affectedb y poison,d epressioni n skull, lumpy
and hard stools,a blation of tonsils,d entaldiseaseest c.

How to apply thesed iseasesis entirelya differentm atter.
The reader will have to make judgements of his based on his
own experiencea, nd from variousangles.

ttqrqnqi qrt il{hi tnqRTdI tlr l
agql {$ rr€ s,iEr trigg; r
*qeqrmi ql* il'dH rawgiu lvrl



158 Brihat Parasara lIora Saslra

qs{d an{i q{ vqtq}Tit si;aq: t
qoeeqrq.rdd l{ f,q.lt a-aina llf rtt
artqridqtqqisctg sa*d fafrflavrat . 
rlTrrqri qil"t <E: *ri qrflauqGqrit lqrt
qrli awr(t|wt qc.tq{i {q*rtilr l
aqlvi qlrrqrftTrt aqt{i aqq({f{|tl tt\etl
fana{m}<q,il ger{td f<faftriqr 
Rgrmrr* qri nfvrqt itR tla tt1 et t
qsqqsqwreEiq wagrzi fcfnfaliq t
q,id tlra<fqreQ wa qrecqf?qilll lell
gr'trufiaa{ g srdtqlfEt} n*q ttletrtt

' 
l3-19t. TIMTNG OF ILLNESS ; The native will be

affiictedb y illnesst hroughout life if Saturn is with Rahu while
the 6th lord and 6th house are conjunct malefics. One will
sufferf rom (severef)e verat the age of 6 and at the ageo f 12 if
Mars is in the 6th while the 6th lord is in the 8th. [f the Moon
is in Sagittarius/Piscewsh ilc Jupiter is in the 6th from the
ascendanto, ne will sufferf rom leprosya t the ageo f 19 and 22.
It Rahu is in the 6th, ascendanlto rd is in the 8th and Mandi is
in an angle,c onsumptionw ill troublet he nativeat the ageo f 26.
Spleenaryd isorders will be experienceda t the ageo f 29 and 30
if the lords of 6th and 12th are in cxchangeo f their signs.
Saturn and the Moon together in the 6th will inflict blood-
leprosya t the ageo f 45. If Saturn is with an inimical planet
while the ascendanlto rd is in the ascendanitt selfw indy disorders
(like rheumatismw) ill troublet he nativea t the ageo f 59.

tti(i Rlufnd aqffi qrq{iRq* llioll
q"i qsln*qqfr qgq{ qqqqq{ |
q66l6eqqa (IdTil€tntrealt qrql rtqttt
anau q;qdt fqx ! cq* q fadltt* t
qi(isfirqri il€t f{qd dhe}uwq llRlll

20-22'U NFORTUNATEYEARS; Should the Moonbe
conjuuctt he 6th lord while the 8th lord is in the 6th and the



Chopterl 7 159
l2th lord is in the ascendant,t he native wirl be troubled bv
animalsa t the ageof eight. 0 Brahmin,i f Rahu is in the 6th
whilc Saturni s in the 8th fron the said Rahu, the child will
havedanler through fire at the ageI  and 2 while in the 3rd year
birds will bring somee vils.

q6Elceqq* HtT aaEqa q;qiqil 
s |

,fqt aqtsit g qq{ite kftfeviqn Rtlr
eI6et Trnilttftr iruqTdI Ef<{t ![at: I
fT{n6e€ vr*st g mtarrla fafqfttinl rRvtl
tri{i rTgi{{i er€ei rarmlqir 
ar?q{iscereqiq d rfiu*6fettsn{ nR{tl

23-25. aNFORTaNATE IEARS (continuad). . Danger
throughw ater will have to be feared during the 5th and the ith
yearsi f the Sun is in the 6th or 8th while the Moon is in the
l2th from thc saids un. Saturni n the 8th as Mars is in the Tth
will causes mall-pox,i n the 10th yeara nd 30th yearo f age.
If 8th lord joins Rahu in an angre/trinef rom the gth housea nd
be in the 8th in Navamsa, the subject will be troubled by
swellingof blood vesselsu,r inary disorderse tc. during the lgth
yeara nd the 22nd year.

Notes : The evils narrateda bover clatingt o the lgt'Li22nd
yearo f age necd some clarification. The 8th lord should be
conjunctRahui nthe 2nd, 4th, 5th, l l th or l2th from the
ascendant. The said 8th lord should simultaneousblye  in the
8th place from the Navamsa ascendant (i.e. in the gth in
Navamsac hart). As a result,t he native will incur urinary ancl
blood vessedl isordersi n l9thl22nd year of age.

iltti Rgvrer.i qli{i FTr$TtrffIli 
gdanrei Ed {rtHqraqarq:n Rqll

26. LOSS THROUGH ENEMIES .. Loss of wealth will
comet o pass during the 3lst yeari f the llth and 6th lords
exchangeth eir Rasis.



160 Brihat ParasaraH ora Sastra

sii fqqqrqeq qciqi gnili t
drt{t q.foiqri tr€t ga} Rg{iq lrRell

emies
2'1.I NIMICAa SONS One'so wn sonsw ill be his en

e 6th " h Jupiter'
'iCf tih*uef iituhn .lo"rsdl yi s in ttr while the 6th lord is wit

the l2th lord shouldb e in the ascendant'

f,riri qsad{Rai Fr{t{r qGattRlri I

s{ridtiffisia nqq'r<ftffltiqe llRqll

28. FEARFROM DOGS There will be fear from dogs
 " 

Ourinf tt',cl 0th and lgth yeari f the ascen<lanlto rd and the 6th

lord are in exchange.

st{t ctlqlqttt$f,Isqltt: lll qll

Chapter1 8

Effects Of The Seventh House
qTqFnTnrqq.sudi{ qEEt  qqt tRqi rlaqsfsttft,rqrt  I! I

**r"t sq* Tq]=?:{ tgd gutnrfilqr r1 rr
l. O excellenot f the Brahmins'l istent o me detailingth e

effectso f the 7th house. If the 7th lord is in his own signo r in

exaltation, one will o..iut full happinesst hrough his wife (and

marriage),

rnerltq] fq{r €Ei 6{qq66l6eqRqa: t

<Jftroifg ret ntt tqr (Hlfssi fqct ttRtt
' 

2. SICK WIFE Should the 7th lord be in the 6th' 6th
" 

or th;l2th, the wife will be sickly' This' however'd oes not

appfyt o own houseo r exaltationp lacementa s above'

Notes :Thep lacemento f the?th lo rd in the6th /8 th / l2 th
will causea  sickly wife' (Sim ilarly Venusi n an evil house)' If-be
the saidh ouseh appensto  exaltationo r own sign' then this



16l'
Chaptertt  

need not be feared. For example,s aturni n capricorn for a
iro outi"" or Venus in Piscesfo r an Ariesn ative'

qni g fi'{d g*fnntr fr;11 r
ur-ge-h€ qtqti *{lr<ui qaEt tl tt

3.EXCESSIVELIBIDINOUSNESSIDEATHOFWIFE:
tf venus is in the 7th, ibe native will b.e.e xceedinglyl ibidinous'

y house will cause-loso
Vr""t s f wife'

.i"f"i"g o .ut.fi" in an

snrneitw:q t{m} qrEJ fl wdga: t
ilil cr* q;it srr{t : nvll

{fi lrflts* qr fi{* tt-sc?qt 
agrR iff"il wut cgmaTd  qiq ttrtt

4-5. THE 7TH LORD Should the ?th lord be endowed
and be conjun"c  a benefic' the

with strength t or be aspectedb y
rtu.nate'

i"uC,ion-.o u.*,o.tlvn,  U" wealthy, honourable' happy and fo.
if the 7th iorrf is in fall or is combust or is in an

;;;;;;t;, one will acquires ick wivesa nd manv wives'

Notcs : Plurality of wives and sickness to them will

.orn, io passwith the 7th lord's occupying lis siSno f debilita-

tion or having got combust or inimical placement' There is
-lord 

;;" ,; in" ztl for pluralitv of wivest han what it stated'

as it will be evident from practical experience'H owever't his

to the 7th lord wili cause delays and disappointments
"i"ini.i."p,i."""  of marriage apart from sicknesst o spouse' If the

?th lord is in an sign, the native'sw ife will scarcely
"n".ty;' 

honour him.

ffiQ qfqrdtt q|ifail t
{{-igt ?TI anqlutd {rrlwil |

qdE-qn fq{iiqr qg{rd fi S6 11q11

6. PLURALITY OF WIVES If the ?th lord is in a sign
sp"e ofsaturnor ofvenus and bea ctedb y abenefic,therewill

t.,"iv should the ?th iord be particularly in exalta-

tion, the "siarrm_.e e frectsw ill come to pass'

lttaregl qt qn"t q?i trf{Rrf{eq: I
dtfna: tt\ett

Ei rqtqqrtgl FEat(Hlq 



162 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastrc

ti furn a qtatq  qfqrqr {t qf sdtfrar r
T* ngumrqt raqrfffilq.g gr d uer l
{at a gfiqoit ?ttilrl recagwitrei: r

7-gt. MISCELLANEOUS MATTERS .' The native will
befriend barren females( for sexual union) if the Sun is in the
7th. The Moon thereinwill causea ssociationwith suchf emales
as correspondingt o the sign becoming the 7th. Mars placed
in the 7th will denote associationwith marriageableg irls (or
thosewith menses)o r with barrenf emales. Mercury indicates
harlots,m ean females and femalesb elongingt o traders'com-
munity. Wife of a Brahmin or a pregnantf emale will be in the
native'sa ssociationif Jupiteri s in the 7th. Base females and
females having attained their courses are denotedb y Saturn/
Rahu/Ketu in the 7th.

Notes : Any planet in the 7th (includingt he ?th lord, vide
ch. 24, sloka79) is normally indicative of absenceo f sterling-
uessi n characteri n the mattet of sexualu nion.

If the Sun is in the 7th in a horoscope promisingl ose
character, the native will scek pleasures from femalesw ho are
barren. As regards the Moon, the kind of females to sexually
intercoursew ith, will correspondt o the sign becoming the 7th
house. For example, when Virgo becomest he 7th house the
female is a virgin; Libra prostitutes, Gemini a housew ife and
so on and so forth. Mars in the 7th denoteg a female that
has come of marriageable age or one who is in her monthly
course or one devoid of conceivinga bility. Similarly, in other
cases. Jnpiter in theSh is alsono exception.

The abover esults shouldbe declaredo, nly after ensuring
that the nativei s primarily disposedto go out of the way for
sexualu nion, with the support of other horoscopici ndications.

gitq gfft't rrQ qrft**Fqigm ttett
tfaalerigqrd q {ti ?Tdqq6rif I

9-9t. Mars denotes a . female with attractivebreasts.
Saturn indicatess ick and weaks pousc. Jupiter will bring a
spousewith hard and prominentb rcbstsw hile Venuswill bring
one with O:1Tt *O excellent breasts.



Chapterl E 163
tif"]}irno 

Notes,  irr$Efi specifiwc ordi n c'" ut3*l
linest o mean,t r,rpouse'i,tih esFp lancts,{rQhtedto ;dfihho'[es:blr
occupation,a speeto r ownership)w i  ll'caum ;'obt4'idnoqfoi f Bucf;
wives. Thesec an also indicate the kind of females" rh*
s-e:x.u allyu nitpsw ith. 'riaai:nl i 1'gluhnlil iw sviisn grlT '€

i* laiqnrrq"r t* ifqwu.s'*"1i fiYrii'-,lft*
.qrarq firxt?tTrt:T $fdfil qrfaf,q<lu6E,lr ilt ni alidsd
lnrfqi q'{dn ':r;ffifit qeqTfril 
'ltv{t {,}ilt:" ,;

,i,, qrwfUl Erdnq.qrnqq lar ivrqi:l "'i'i#.-ui"
Sqiqtfrrt q* qtqd"rrtscrqT lq'Qlurtma irl

F'lqqlt q E€ qt iqqgilqffl qffi 
-q* tiv.t

qqiqrrrr* q;Eqirqtsfq a Pfitl|
p<gd :r Ee tt wfir*r*tl}:ogn

10-13i.M aleficsi n. the lZth and ?th while deel9agTg
frfoooL lo'tnr 5th denoteth at then ativew ill bec ontrolledb y
il* **;""-* *irr u" inimicatlo  ther ace( o.r,family'f)f'. !,li
Itn t outt is . occupied or owned by Siturn/M?rst llg t!{1e
tvilt begeta  harlot as his spouseo r shet vill be attlleg tq otner

men illegally. Should Venusb e in a Navamsao f Mars or in a

hasi of iuIurc or be in aspect to or conjunct Mars'.t he native

iil l "kisr" the private partsof the,female',,FfV enlp"ipsg.t
ielated to Saturn, the native will jikigs" t[e ptivat'e Fa{$ ot

thc male' r,!, i 'tri i ii soitt)glr1 *vilr:tl :'dt ro'l Jmsemp i
.i1", Notes i- There arc four hiiits given inrfh abqYftUefOApr4E
under :  " i . . t . . j i , ' -r ' lr;:n. i  i i  .ol . ; , ' r

l. The Moon with decreasingr ays i4 the 5th -!gu*sew hile
t h e l 2 t h a n d t h e T t h a i e " o c c t f f e d b y i i i i a l e f i c p , E u e t s t h c
spousew ill be high-handeda nd;:rwill'F al,.hggstls4eilvith the
'f"a-m"'ilrv: ;m;fefmi berso f the native e 

;; *"t, ij" ',t ift louse,'b1.b*'n,i'lrIlil:gt.t9l Lh
house : the spouse will be of qtr-qtlonable, charactc1: 
the placement of Saturn (and) orjif,lait'in the 7th lirtittseis  bad
for ihe charac(er of the spousg,M ars Erps aturp ruling the 7th
houses hould not simply leaa to the frfiitioti of the said effect.
C"i".r, teo; Ta1rru*l"nA :f,ilgliisl trofi a$tiiiidantsl' iave the
7{\,,1,p;dph.ip,sggl,q urnn,r  i}vla{la\}Qfr,tiosd r'491;S. q cpseof
i i t l c r l l ' l i . ; ; . 1 ! l ! I e t l | . ; , i r l l E . r l t D s r l t o t b s t s g s l c r e i b n e r i l g n c r l .



t& Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
thesef our ascendants,t here must be severeafliction to the
7th from oth6r sources so that the spousei s not chaste in
cbaracter.

3. The native will indulge in kissingt he privities of the
female if Venusi s in a Rasi or Navamsao f Mars, or is aspected
by or in conjunction with Mars. That is, he will have unusual
habits in the matter of sexual gratifcation from the female.

4. Venus,i Frelated to Saturn and his divisionsi nsteado f
to Mars and his divisions as stated in point 3 above, the
native will haveugly relations with another male, for subduing
his mad lust.

qtiri rffirrQ qi {qrqFqi rtlytl
qfinl .r€sg'ftt: srtgtFqri€gt: I
a$Trqt Tqfftqdr gaq\esqffitt lt{tt

l+15. WORTEY SPOUSE.. The native will beget a
spouseendowed with (the sevenp rincipal) virtues who will
expand his dynasty by sons aird grandsons if the 7th lord is
exaltedw hile the 7th is occupiedb y strong ascendantl ord anJ
a benefic.

Notes : The above verses hint at the possibility of the
native obtaining children (and grandchildren) ifthe ascendant
tord with strengthi s in the 7th with a benefic as the Zth lord
is disposedi n exaltation sign. The combination in question
is meant for the native begettinga  virtuous wife as well. The
mere exaltationo i the 7th lord is capableo f bestowinga  virtuous
rvife, if not progeoy.

sqi ilffdf ?rR qrqrqeqft€ |
qTtr{ qt ilFr Grrit q firtqa: nltrtl

16. EVILS TO SPOUSE...I f the 7th houseo r its lord is
conjunct a malefic the native's wife 'incur 

will evils, especialtyif 
the 7th houseo r its lord is bereft of strength.

qc6Ferrtqq(rtri q*{il gliq} qfE I
*qtrf{Fr* Trfr {rcfid fqfiTf<rt(u  tetl

17. LOSS OF S?OASE.. If the ?th lord is devoido f
strengtha nd is relegatedt o the 6th, 8th or the l2th, or ifthe Zth



Chapter 18 t65
lord is in fall, the native'sw ife will be destroyed(i .e.s hewill die
early).

TT?TqIEi q,T nfr{i qq{rfirri r
$r<lil qn€tflq qrsfq{ il ftail rrlerr

18. LACK OF CONJUGAL FELICffV.. If the Moon is
in the 7th as the ?th lord is in the l2th and the Karaka (indicator
venus) is bereft of strength,t he native wil not be endowedw ith
marital happiness.

Notes : The Moon refened to here should obviously be
decreasingT. he Moon increasingw, hile althought he other part
of the planetaryc onditions as statedi n the sloka is fulfilted,lwill
stall the adversitya nd improvet he situation.

ficaid T"{ffi qFTd rmrgil r
qqt lqlq<r{di &qTqTqr f,sl rti( rrte.rr
6q"rqni ql* {* wfq$ nqt r
qQt q?Errrftd sq?"qErq n\ rrlorr
fa€qrqq* {* €}ii anffi r
{rtd qqdg{t agarcerfm:l lRt ll

19-21.PLURALITY OF WIVES.. One wiil have two
wives if the 7th lord is in fall, or in a malefic,sS ign along with a
malefic while the 7th house ,or the ?th Navamsab elongst o a
cunuch planet. If Mars and Venusa re in the 7th or if Saturn is
in the 7th while the lord of the ascendantis  in the 8th, the native
will have 3 wives. There will be many wives if Venusi s in a
dual sign while its lord is in exaltationa s the Zth lord is endowed
with strength.

Notes : For a dual marriage,t he 7th from the natal ascen-
dant or the 7th from Navamsa ascendanst hould be owned by a
eunuch planet. So to say, Gemini, Virgo, Capricorn or Aquarius
should be the 7th as above. While this is fulfilled, the ?th lord
(from natal ascendant)s hould be in his sign of debilitation or in
a malefic'ss igna long with a malefic.

, The other two yogasa re simplea nd needn o elaboration.



edt ' 
i66 Erihat ParasaraH ora Sastra
tib ilivrr* ii,' :.i) boqerrl:  i ' I'r,!i i;,r":  "

{rtri rJqd{RQ F'lweqdqaq} 1:r 
qs<nZ f*sA.S ffi: rtanl q+qr rR(rr

zz.n *t:or aTnnt&oi fup,os toka3 4).'I f the? th
jordi s iflatffnho's hofie (6Fint he9 tha ssubhaR assi omeans)
UpilS-Yfi1,",tqt4t hdJg{3isi n ownsign,t hen ativew ill marry
q1,1198of;rf ?i ,'?Uf tr t n' r
,ri,, il{qfeli  Thc,figq,Rm$a rriageindicateidn  thet extwill not
be practicailn all caseisn  the moderns ociacl onditions.These
U$[h,pfrSplyr,hfffl,in knowingof earlya ndbelatedm arriages.
tFn*;"lnmplfr,thep qEqgnstlo kas houldt ell us of the possibilityo f
qnsl.mfiTfiagg$. in?, literallya t the ageof 5 or 9.

qt<wFi qt q{ n{ti ITqgil r
qqqfnd q{ fqqer{,,  nq{ft  q\ rrqtrr

21,]Etlr*Sun is in the 7th while his dispositorisc onjunct
Venus,t Kcldh'ftl be marriagea t 7th or I lth year of age.

lqr$rni rI* {rii ilqqf{ri I
qrl 3i lvrnsri q f{dr(: $q{r} q+( ttlvtt

2fir\t{tugi n the2 ndwhileth e7 thl ordi s in the llth will
at theageo f l0 or 16.

:ff ffi;"ge 
s rt,i,r,ffi*"rqt qf qdi q.-r(tfrti t
s.ore  'insi6rrfr n t firrrt qqil trt: uR{tl
:i T,2'i Marriagew ill take placed uringt hc I lth yeari f Venus
il in iri anglcf rom the ascendanwt hilet he ascendanlot rd is in
Sspricorn/Aquarius.

qrfiI ltafit tI* il€qq nrqqt nql t
ffi ilrrirlafqrt q frnq: rrqdil q*{ rrtqrr
zrr i r  26. Thenat ive wi l l  narryat 12or 19if  Venusis inan
bngle from the ascendant while Saturn is in the 7th counted
Iiom Venus.

q;lr$iltM $ {nr"qfqri ml t
qiqtsran{i trF* Fqq{ q€ ir: llRsll

2?. Should Venusb e in the 7th from Moon while Saturn
is in thc 7th from Venus,m 4rriagewill be in the l8th year.



Ohapter 18 167

qii eilqrrfqt(t 6nffi mffni r
qQ qFitili qrQ fqil€ qqil ;R: niqtl

28. Marriagewillbe in the l5th year if the 2nd lord is in
thc llth while the ascendanltord is in the l0th.

alqi ilq1rfuF* f,rQi qRTf{ri t
srei ?ql{i nr.t fqqt€ qqt q(: uRqr

29. An exchangeb etween the lords of the 2nd and the
I lth will bring marriagel 3 yearsa fter birth.

(;Errscrrfqai {ft il{H qlqigt I
Erfq{i qciltffisi fqqrd qqi ;r(: uQotl

30. One's 22ndl27thy ear will confer marriage if Venusi s
in the 7th from the 8th house (i.e. the 2nd from ascendant),
while his dispositori s conjunctM ars.

Notes : The Yogasg ivenf rom this sloka throughsloka 34
will delayo ne'smarriageas could be easilyu nderstood.

qni{Tsqt qrd-?rE {riq{t aq* r
q us.favi fqqr{ arrt aq: ullrl

3"1q. STh{qoui ldt he 7th lord be in the l2th while the natal
ascendanlto rd is in the 7th in Navamsa,marriagew ill be in
23rdl26thy earo f age.

Notes : The ascendantl ord (in Rasi chart) should be in
the ?th sign in Navamsachart while the 7th lord in Rasi is in
the yearsl 2th in Rasit o givem arriagea t23126o f age.

$f{i qn{rf{rai qrEid Tgfit* l
q=qfq* Tqf€ili' fqqlE qqe q(: ulRtl

32. Either the 25thy ear or the 33rd year will bring
marriagei f the 8th lord is in the 7th as Venus is in Navamsa
ascendant.

qrqrqqrrqqt q* alal <r6ig* r
qrfavnnuteai Er<eTS fqftfqriqu llrl

33. ShouldVenusb e in the 9th from the 9th (i.e. in the



l6E Brlhat ParasaraH ora Sastra

5th house),while Rahu is in one of the said houses( i.e. in thc
sth/gth), marriagew ill take placed uring 3lst or 33rd year.

qrqtcqfrtei gti qgn qrqf,TqtI 
f"i lt ecafq{nl fqqr{ erlfr ir(: ulYtr

' 34. The native will many at 30 or 27 if Venus is in the
ascendanwt hile the ?th lord is in the 7th itself.

ilti {trqrtnet q* r;arRijil r
3r6er{i rqrefli qffii qlrrnRq illtrr
qti qnmfrtrt cqli rrE<rfnir 
rrrr qdifmEt rrc{Td fthf<riq ulqtl
!Erq({Irnl (q: wri *rigi r
nfr,rqtq fefci q{qrt a{r!fa: ulell
qrErcenilri q'i ilfri tlR<rfnri r
urrfirHl"qnrci qrcanl fctafeviqtl lqtl
qfi{i t'titrm qid fiqd qi r
qdEi iI wnTceln n?ar $nitq nlqrr

35-39. TIMING OF WIFE'S DEATH .. Loss of wife wil
occurinthe lSth yearor33rd yearof age'oft he nat ivei ft he
?fh lord is in fall white Venus is in the 8th. One will losehis
spousein  his l9th year if the 7th lord is in the gth while the
l2th lord is in the 7th. The native's wife will die within three
dayso f marriaged ue to snakebite if the native hasR ahu in the
2nd and Mars in the 7th. If Venus is in the gth while his
dispositori s ia a sign of Saturn, deatho f wife will.t ake place
during the native'sl lth or 2tst yearo fage. Should the ascen-
dant lord be ip his sign of debilitation as the 2nd lord is in the
Eth, lossof wife will occur in the l3th yearo f age.

r!{rsilfiT?i ffi q"fiaqTfr?i qi r
Tdt $fqrTei rqd wqTGEsqn yotl
ertqti rl Gfl{ q qdtaq r
Rwq qqt qid ;ns"?q tftiiqlit  fqqrwt uyttl



Chapter t9 169

40-41.T HREE MARRIAGES: Shouldt he Moon be in the
7th from Venusw hile Mercury is in the 7th from the Moon and
the 8th lord is in the 5th (from the ascendant),t here will be
marriagei n the l0th year followed by another in the 22nd year
and yet anotheri n the 33rdy ear.

qG* q $rqt rlr; qtat rrg€feqfa: r
srret q qiil dRwrq qTqt r aitqfr uvRtl

42, DEATH OF WIFE .' If the 6rh, 7th and 8th are in
their order occupiedby Mars, Rahu and Saturn, the native's
wife will not live (long).

qet ETtq+rtqqqrbqrnqt :  Q.tl
I

Chapter1 9

EffectsO f The'EighthH ouse
sTlgqtq\rcfq rsq $qqfq frqlm ! r
qrg:Fenqfqq:* ri alfrrg: irT€qft il ttl

t. LONG LIFE : O excellent of the Bratrmins,l isten to
me speakingo n the effectso f the 8th house. If the 8th lord is
in an angle,l ong life is indicated.

srlgT{irfuq: qrt: qE a*q iftqd: i
*leqeqqd qd aniqilicqq iRqa: rrRrr

2. SHORTLIFE : Shouldt he 8th lord join the ascendant
lord or a malefica nd be in the 8th itself, the nativew ill be short-
lived.

q{ l€ ltfr{r fq;m t,,rqt adfqqensi:t 
Fqt&tq q il{il fqfff F',rrrqqql:ll u



170 Brilwt Parasara Hora Sastra

3. SATURN AND TENTH LORD ABOUT I.ONGEVITY:
Similarly consider Saturn and 10th lord in the matter of
longevity.

Notes : To get the actuali mport of this verse,w e should
read it in the context of the previous verse. So to say, short
life will comet o passi f :

l. The 8th lord is in the 8th along wjth a malefico r along
with the ascendanlto rd or

2. Saturn joins a malelic/ascendanlot rd in the gth house
or

3. The l0th lord is in the 8th alongw ith a maleficp lanet/
ascendanlto rd.

q68 aqtsfq qa8{il .qqrcft{ftf rqt aqt r
qristat ftml qrsfq EtFiqrgt:r q?qfilu vtl
?i{Tenir aiu* q$fq lq*{i fqeqfiEi r
itqtgq rqltte eri{r}sceqq: 5.T1: {tl
R$tTcaqqft'{vrq;{r: *rrfam}qq}: I
ini il dRmrecal fa*g<friwrglr\u rrll
q{ agfam far<rgfi'n: rfr:}fril: I
qE q) qq{iwcqrsgilrrqrgrrFfli( netl

4-7. LONG LIFE : Therew ill be long life lf the 6th lord
is in the 12thor if the 6th lord is in the 6th as the l2th lord is
in the l2th or if the 6th lord and l2th lord are in the ascendant
and the 8th. If the lordsof the 5th, gth and ascendanatr ei n
o\r'n navamsaso,w n Rasiso r in friendly signl, the native will
enjoya  longspano f life. shouldt he Iordso f rhe ascentrangt,t h
and l0th and Saturn are all disposedse verallyin  an angle,i n a
trine or in the llth, the subjecwt il l rivel ong. Like thcset,h ere
are manyo thery ogasd ealingr vith the issueo f longevity, The
strengtha nd weaknesso f the planetsc oncernedb e estimateidn 
decidinglo ngevity.

Notes : In sloka 4, we have three yogasf or long life.
Theseare :

1. The 6th lord in the l2th.



Chapter1 9 l7L

2. The 6th and l2th lords simultaneously in the 6th and
the l2th.

3. The 6th lord in the ascendantw hile the l2th lord is in
the 8th.

The combinationsg iveni n the other two versesa re quite
clear.

srGamfuqal* ;i qfii sqqfqt r
knaqtqqql dt+t aili{tnqlgq{ uqrl
cri{i q^tq<rfntQ(;si wwl{i r
ilit 5'i* q€.uqTg{qfr t{?t{ llell
<;rii nftXlfr tsri wQ{il t
qn Trqqrftr?e qrilqt{ :  {a { \  n to t l
t;af"fi']qqt: qmr:{ Fn: q66IGeqI qfE I
qri {tqrq-arin} !ilrr: (€r} !a'f qt u t t rl
trsql wigr* <i*d wi'gi I
r;ri wwQ{lt ?urcqqrg:r qHfr lllRll
r;ri{i tntrfqrt tri qrqqqfiq*| 
{-rqTfcafqfliq  qTffi* a 1R{iq n11tl

8-13., SHORTL IFE.' One's span of life will bebetween
20 and 32 yearsi f the ascendanlto rd is weakwhile the 8th lord
ig in an angle. The native will only be short-lived if the 8th
-lord is in fall while the 8th hasa malefici n it and the ascendant
lord is bereft of strength. Death will be instant at birth if the
8th house,8th lotd and the l2th house are all conjunctmalefics.
Malefic in angles/trinesa nd beneficsi n 6thiSth while the ascen-
dant hasi n it the 8th lord in fall : this yoga wlll causei mmedi-
ate end. If the 5th house,8th houseand the 8th lord are all
conjunct malefics, the lifie span will be very brief. Within a
month of birth, death will befall the child if the 8th lord is in
the 8th itself while the Moon is with maleficsa nd be berefto f
beneficiala spect.

Notes : If the 8th lord is in an angle,t he native-willb e
long-lived, according to sloka I of the present chapter. The'
ascendantio rd bereft of strength,i n such a case,w ill reducet he



r72
life spana s per verse g bove. Hencei t 
lord's  disposition- a fotows 

good that the gth
is .a lone *J-.i""gfr, 

ascendanlt
ut 

o 
b

rd the powcr 
is a simultaneous of

need,f or I tong life.
In sloka 12, it is statedt hat gth lord 

the should 
ascendant. be 

For in 
no ttr falt 

ascendant, in
t he g fora 

th.e l, 
a scending O.ii'ffi;;

s ign. This is possible when 
fails onty 

in the 7th the gth 
or gth bhava

sisn 
--ror r*urp-t",-in 

suppose certain 
th e last portion ratitudes,

of Virgo rises. 
bility Then 

of the. gth there ;;';;i
cuspf alling ii f""irr. in 

Venus, that 
can case, 

be debilitated its ruler,
i n Virgo, tn" ascloOing 

wise, sign. 
b y signsi t Other-

is not possible.
Shouldt he gth lord be in the gth,.I ong 

denoted. life to the 
But native

when simultaneously i s
tU L f"floo 

malefic is captured
a nd be without b y a

any help from a benefic,
to life spanw 

t hen 
ill early

have e vils
t o be predicted,v ide Joka 13 above.

qfii Fqltqrrf{R4 Td ilwcqfqt,
{reTTqt;Tqi dt+ €rinrgri ivrR;*  
ilinlsfiqdt qee: lyrr

trriet: 
ui: etigt: {waf:r 

*iri rldmg: xq?qfrl ttrr
l+15, LONG LIIE (asainl .' 

ascendan one vtilt 
,to rd be 

is longtived 
in exaftatioi if the

respectivery *itirr in. iioon 
i n the and 

tth. Jupiter
and a re

sttr-i-rn-t'rr'e 
ascendanlto rd ascendant. 

is exceedingly If the
s trong j" 

from an.1nele, urp."ted 
the person concern"eoda  

by a benefic
and will 

longlived. be wealthy, virtuous

Notes : Even if Jupiter 
se,i t leadst o a lon-gil sihja.^nh 

_isl
hou  onelyw ell_phcedi n rhe gth

of, ffi;f;eJ.' ;;,ne 
the i?fre"is

Moon being f urtner 
i n the helpedb y

exaltation,d oubtlessly ascendantto rd,s
th e life will be.*...aiogty lengthy.

ANT CLASSTCS(Text  wt  f l , r Eng l l sh  T rans la t l on )
tL I_12 Volumes 
I '  ser)

i { IDHf  Ka].yqna,varma,
Rama Dayalu



qq $TfTq$ttql$Ftlstttlt:t tR o | |
Chapter2 0

Effects Of The Ninth House
sT{t qrqqFi f{s r m{ qq} il€Tlsilr: r
F{q}qrq+ qrrisna} unaga} q}a rrtrr
mrq€e{rilrfrsiR qdt{i *;aiftqt r
vri{i av$Xt* qrnraga} wiq rrqrr

l-2. COMBINATIONS FOR FORTANES.. O Brahmin.
now listent o effectso f the 9th house. one will be fortunate( or
affiuent)i f the 9th lord is in the 9th with strength. should
Jupiterb e in the 9th houscw hile 9th lord is in an aigre and the
ascendanltord is endowedw ith strength,o ne wilt be-e xtremely
fortunate.

Notes : "Bhagyasthana"i s a name given to the 9th house.
"Bhagya" denotesf ortunes, affiuencee tc. Hence from the 9th
house,o ne's-c - apacity to retain the wealthe arnqd 

. should be
Btudied. 

wrii aeiX* tTrl qgqqt-qi I
qrdq *;aqi t't+ fqar qrrqarlfiETual:t l

3. FORTUNATE (AFFLUENT) FATHER.. If the 9th
lord is with strengtha s venusi s in the 9th while Jupiteri s in an
anglef rom the ascendantt,he native'sf ather is fortunate.

sTntrFcTrafqa ilA qr gd q'tTrsqfiqir 
ilri{i alqtTfflrt fqar fqdq q?re  nyll

4. INDIGENT FATHER .. If the 9th lord is debiltated
while the zndl4th from the 9th is occupiedb y Mars, the native:s
father is poor.

Notes : It is stateo that Mars in the l0th or l2th from
the ascendant( i.e. the 2nd or the 4th from the 9th) while the



174 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

9th lord is in debilitation denotesp overty of wealth for the
father. Even if thereb e somewealth of the father, Mars in
the l0th/l2th (not being in own houseo r in exaltation)w ill
make the nativc disinherit patrimonyo r enter into litigations.
So to say, such patrimony will not comet o the handsof the
native,t hat too easily.

qrQd qrqliqrei qrqi{i dtqiqi r
qcniq.gcel {* iliqiil {hidtrrq: rrtrr

5. LONG LIVING FATHER.' Should the 9th lord be in
deep exaltation while Venus is in angle from the ascendanat nd
Jupiter is in the 9th from NavamsaAscendant,t he father of the
native will enjoy a long-spanof life.

qrriri *rrnq€i gqqrrq  RttfH r
dEfqil nqir{la} qqr il ff€Tft rriq rrqrr

6. ROYAL STATUS FOR FATHER.. If the 9th lord is
an angle in.aspectt o Jupiter, the native'sf ather will be a king
endowedw ith conveyanceosr  be equalt o a king.

qnt{i r{qresi 6f{i mqrrFri I
{u16t ffiTqrnq dtfrqiraftqil qiq n\etl

7. WEALTHY AND FAMOUS FATHER.' Shou|d the
lord of the 9th be in the 10thwhile the l0th lord beingaspected
by a benefict he native'sf atherw ill bevery rich and farnous.

q<qkqirti qi qrtt qrqiRqi r
qfqsol Trrfi?qcq: ftqtnil s?e+nr:t crt
qraTftamlvriq f qrid qrffiftqi r
g(utt qRA Ee f\qfiasqfiq'{: rrerr

8-9. VIRTUOaS AND DEVOTED TO FATHER; Should
the Sun be in deepexaltationas the 9th lord is in the llth, the
nativew ill be virtuous,dear to king and devotedt o father. If
the Sun is in a trine from the ascendanwt hile the 9th lord is in
the 7th in conjnctionwith or in aspect o Jupiter,t he nqtivewill
be devotedt o his father

^ - i i  
1 :

l , l .  r , r  .  - . 1



Chapter 20 175
qTQ{i s?rqtq(Q uifr $nq{rRrt l
ElfT{niqr-d} qrrd qTE{ dtfrsrwq: nlotl

10. FORTUNESE TC. : Aquisition of fortgnes, convey-
ancesa nd famc will follow the 32nd year of age if the 9th lord
ie ln the 2nd while the 2nd lord is in the 9th.

il,iri rrrrar<rfnri qaBdq qqf;Ei I
wqlqiq Wi crErfiSi fiqal niqrrlqrr

ll, INIMICAL TO FATHER.' There will be mutual
enmity betweent he father and the nativei f the ascendanlto rd is
in the 9th but with the lord of the 6th. Further, the native's
father will be of contemptibled isposition.

Fqmuqq qQa] fir6|qftg fr{q: t
Frrqql {tqqard qlql frrqrltrm:n tRrl

12.'BEGGED FOOD .' If the 10th lord and 3rd lord are
both bereft of strength while the 9th lord is in fall or in combus-
tion, the nativew ill go abeggingfo r his food.

qcilcerrEqt rrq rdqi wufgi I
eqA{ii lao1its4 us}d qrqt f€qiutQtl
ilir€ !il-{iT?R?i ErdfiTq $adiq t
t;nrqra{i {d <;tii qlrqr{rdi lltvll
qrif€q sqrTrEt g &g{wrtr{ade r
Eqt{i qrrq(lftrTi i'tqifi qTqnrq+u t{tt
qiill slcfi q{ q{firrr $a'f,iq r
qfii rrqrafwt rr$ii rugiti u t qtl
fddta aTaqi q{ ftgd<arrrfe$qr 
TilarEr$rqi TIE} qrtrrqqrqqi (q}rrq\err
frs{iscerE{i {d q?T6Tq qfiloinq I

t a
F \  $

ttgqll ql(* qd  aarT($marri n?Tl"ltlc{l
eta*tlqflqnr* ilimr qwf s{q{ |
qFiqi aqq<fqrct dqf{i qrqrrfrri u{Q.rl



t76 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

e<rGqfqirqqf€q &gdrwwrfevrq 
qEriti ir RqA qd' fftfi t;aiti uRotl
q=qt"{ifiqeqrfqqrad qqoi ftg: r
ftqernrfut qf ffErrlcmqfiqir rRlrr
qpqmaiqi qr.ft cFrfiTrr$ a{nq t
qr{q qqqi qf stq€cilqqFilTr: ilRRu
qGsel qsqfqqlrd {rg{rwrnfafiq t
$aqrfqei wt qsilwrrfqai <qJulitl
fintoffi qstq* snrrrr 1|af,iqr 
qrrli {tqqrftR?i ilEtti qrqrfvtri nRVtl
qsfqqisce qq?tx{i fqg{<qrnfqriar 
qd qnrsq ,tqalqiif ilriil fqqf(i(uRill

13-25.C OMBINATIONS FOR FATHER'S DEATH : The
father of thp nativew ould havep asseda way prior to the native's
birth if the Sun is in the 6thlSthllzth as the 8th lord is in the
9th, the l2th lord is in the ascendanta,n d the 6th lord is in the
5th house. Shouldt he Sun be in the 8th while the 8th lord is in
the 9th, the native'sf ather will pass away within a year of his
birth. If the lord of the l2th is in the9th whilet hc 9th lord is in
debilitationNavamsat,h e native'sf ather will facehis end during
the 3rd/l6th year of the native. Death of fatherwill occur in
the 2ndor l2th yeari f the ascendanlot rd is in the 8th as the 8th
lord is with the Sun. Should Rahu be in the 8th from the 9th
(i.e. 4th from the ascendant)a s the Sun is in the 9th from the
9th (i.e. 5th from the ascendant)d,e atho f father will take place
in the 16th/l8thy earo f the native. If Saturni s in the 9thf rom
the Moon ast he Sun is with Rahu,t he native'sf athbrwill die in
the 7th or the 19th year of the native. The nativei n his 44th
year will loseh is father if the 9th lord is in the l2th as the l2th
lord is in the 9th. If the ascendantl ord is in the 8th as the
Moon if in the Sun'sN avamast,h e native in his 35th/4lsty ear
will loseh is father. One will lose his father in the 50th yeari f
the Sutr,b eingt he lord of the 9th, is conjunctM ars and Saturn.
If the Sun is in the 7th from the 9th (i. e. 3rd from the ascen-
dant) as Rahu is in the 7th from the 3r<l (i.e. 9th from the



Chapter 20 177
ascendant), the 6thl25th year of the native will be fatal for
father. If Saturni s in the 7th from the gth (i. e. 2nd from the
ascendanta) s the Sun is inthe Zth from Saturn (i.e. gth from
the ascendant),t he ages of 30, 2l or 26 will be fatal for the
father. If the 9th lord is in debilitationw hile his dispositori s
in the 9th, the nativew ill loseh is fathera t 26 or 30. Thus the
astrologcrsm ay know the effects( of the 9th house).

qrqh"i{ri {* qrttr qqfiTi r
snt?qfi nf.Si AqTrqrfilfr rriE rrtqrr

26. FORTUNES .. One will enjoy abundant fortunes if
Venusi s in deepe xaltation and be in the companyo f the 9th
lord as Saturni s in the 3rd.

gtlrr itri qFi r*{i kr<rRri r
f,iuaafq qt *q qgqrd frfafcriqu Qetl
q'<ffi RtA qntt qnrr<rftriI 
q{fl{yilEq qt *q q6fl.ri RF{f{& uRqtl

27-28. IURTUNATE ?ERIODS .. Abundant fortunes
will be acquireda fter the 20th yeari f the 9th hasJ upiter in it as
its lord- is in an anglef rom the ascendant. ShouldM ercury be
in his deepe xaltationa s the 9th lord is in the 9th itself,a bundant
fortunesw ill be earneda fter the 36th year.

qrif TrrrrrrTfyRqi Fn{i qrqiqi r
gaqr €rtt qi qdqEqar$€q uRQ.tl

29. Shouldt he ascendanlto rd be in the 9th as the 9th lord
is^int he-ascendanta, nd Jupiteri s in the Zth, therew ill be gains
of wealtha nd conveyances.

' qnqnqrqml rrdFil{hi fru?i qi r
rrrQi ;itqtrfYrct qnq-ttql rriql; nlotl

30. LACK OF FORTUNES ; If Rahu is in the 9th from
the 9th (i. e.5th from the ascendanta),s  his dispositoLr  il i l;
8th from the ascendanta nd the 9th lord is in fall, the native
will be devoido f fortunes.



178 Brihat parasara Hora Sastara
; firr€qnqi qt {rRrfl ir qrrfiq* r
il+{i ntffffi fqm{fr ir qt riq rr11rr

31. FOOD By BEGGING; ShouldS aturn be in 
along rhe 

with 9th
the Moon as the ascendantr ord is in fat, trt" outi"e

will acquiref ood by begging.

qq qrrqtrFf fqq t iqiqt{ rfqd qqr r
faf<riqn lRrr

. 32._OB rahmin, thesea re the effects related 
house. to the 

l. 9th
I hl explained( these)b riefly.--f tresem ay 

stimated be (further)
c w ith the help of the stateo f tne toros of the ascendant
and 9th and in other mannersa s well.

3TqT dwTEtrf,F[rsqT||1rr t:  tt
Chapter2 l

Effects of The Tenth House
ft*nqffif qrsg s,etlflfq ilqruil: I
llll riiq t il€q W-qrtF{$Trfearrqlr r

l. I now explaint he effectso f the l0th house. Listen 
these,o Maitreya, to

i n the words of Brahma,G argaa nd others.
Notes : Statementsli ke.,,BrahmaG argadiB hashitam,

rove g, p o 
that sageP arasara, to

h ad accesst Jsuch expositions 
Lord Brahma which of

would not be porriUf. ," 
mortal.. The history of parasarah asb eene xpraine"d" "rJi""ry
for the initial in  

slokas the notes
of ch. I supraa nO +t iof.".

"t. 
tqe sfn*{i rqlEa tqti TqTrfrii I
wfiaragftrEd qdFql gwc'{5qrr lrr

2. PATERNAL HA1PINESS..I f tbe 
and lOth lord 

be in is 
exaltation strong

o r in own nusil*auamsa, the native will



Chapter2 l 179
derive extremc paternal happiness, will enjoy, fame and
perform will

good deeds.
Notes : Though the word .,Karma,, means deed, 

actuallyi 
it

n the context of astrology denotesone's 
job, profession,

Iivelihood etc. The lOth h6use rules one's patrimony,
paternalh appiness,last officest o father and such other 
while the matter

9th house,a s explained earlier deals with 
as an individual, one's father

nqffqql EqJn$n-Er {rimwrRdq r
tQ, *;rfet}qreeft'a *frsalqrfeqTq5rrql  u

3. If the l0th lord is devoid of strengtb, the 
face native 

o bstructionsi 
will

n his work. If Rahu is in an angle 
trine, he or 

will perform in a
religious.sacrificelsik e Jyotishtoma.

Notes : Should 
llnu U^est ronglyd isposed

in a i n 
trine, an 

the angle
t ve o na i r

will perform ,.ji",iiiioro.,, 
This is 

sacrifice Soma
deemed as a whole class .sacrificial 

of 
consistingo 

ceremonies
f siiteen vedic rites. ro-r"ii, the 

extremely native 
r eligious will bc

a nd meritorious.

fi,fti Un{td {qTfl?q* ircn I
(r{AIi q {rfqral RETq Trfts.?fzrrnlelvntl 

4. If the lOth lord is with a benefico r be in an 
house, auspicious

one will always gain through royal patro""g; 
business. ;;-;;

In a contrary situation, only opposite results 
comet o pass. witl

Notes : Should lhe lOth lord be \iith a benefico r 
benefic's in 

Rasi,t he a
native'will everg ain in his undertatings

g ( w the kin  i.e. it
in his calling). ,,e4-;qeg.qqJm',

i
e ans that if- wiri

l0th lord the
is with a marefico r in a marefic'sR asi, the nativ. 

be a loseri n his callinga nd will not servet he king (", 
person). ; *;#;

The short and the .long of the vcrser s to conveyt he
ideat hat the rOth rord shourdb e reratedt o a benefic',, ign i.o, 
happy and prosperousc ailing. connectionsw ith a r"r-.n" "
causcg rief. *itt

wt qtqiq{t qT* qrqgqfiqil r
gqFfe arril'qe{: Tqqilfi HRqr: rr{rr



180 Brihat ParasaraHora Sastra

5. Should the l0th and tl,tf, bb both occupiedb y malefics
the native will indulge only in bad deedsa nd will defile his own
mcn.

di tttr<fitgt trgurr rigil ?rqrI 
sttidt rr6qd gqfa qqil -R:n qtl

6; If the lord of thc l0th is relegatedt o the 8th along with
Rahu, the native will hate others, be a great fool and will do
bad deeds.

Notes : The 8th houseo ccupiedb y Rahu in the company
of the l0th lord will spoil professionalh appiness.otfh e nativi
epert from making him perform questionable and foolish deeds
as well as incurring misconccptionsw ith one and all

rdi qidif€A trqq'tqmtqil r
rndq* ftnrtqRTtlqunr:e tl

7. If Saturn, Mar! ano the l0th lord are in the Zth as tho
7th lord is with a malefic, the native will be fond of carnal
pleasuresa nd of filling his belly.

Notes : The effects for the combination Ss above are
describedb y the words "SisnodaraP arayana" (ftrlrfrq<r<rqq:)
and as far as I understand, the meaningi s as above. (Sisna:
male organ, Udrre-belly.)

wqfqiq qr{i gtdgil r
n{ffirri qfrfFtqqilq.n;( ilEtl

rni<rftrf rr{t trridqi t
ilTql Flql nfr gslitqiqFl qlq rrerr
r{i rciXd fln grtqFqil |
?€?rsr3rg'tqrftt qqt ir? inq: rrlott

8-10. Should the l0th lord be in exaltation and be in thc
companyof Jupitera s the 9th lord is in the l0th the nativew ill
be endowedw ith honour, wealth,a nd valour. One will lead a
happyl ife if the llth lord is in the l0th and the l0th lord is in
the asccndanot r if the lords of the l0th and llth are conjunct



Cluptcr 2L l8l
in an anglc. Shouldt hc l0th lord in itrength bc ia picccsa long
with Jupiter,t he nativc will doubtlesso btainr obeso, rnamcnu
and happiness.

ilq?{rlrTqi rrdf,lqeqfiqt
t|qgiq iqlt 6{'€dil qt;rr: nt ttl

ll. Should Rahu, Sun, Saturn and Mars be in the llth,
the native will incur cessationo f his duties.

Notes : The 4 planets, viz, the Sun, Mars, Rahu and
saturn joining in the I lth housew ill ensuret hat the native wifi
not be successfuiln his performrnce. As a consequenceh,e  will
not have a happy calling or profession wortb the name, and
will gain nothing.

t'tt *t lgtt mli wdlt r
€liq<tf{Fril q?i Trq{frraniTq rrftr 1s11 1

12. One will be learneda nd wealthyi f Jupiter rs in pisces
along with Venus while the ascendan tord is strolg and thc
Moon is in exaltation.

Notes : ilt{ means learning in tho normal context.
Apart, this denotess acrcdk nowledge derived from meditatbn
on the higher truths of religion and philosophy which inctruo.tr
thc seekerh ow to understandh is own nature within him ad to
reunite with the Almighty avoiding reincarnation. Tbir ir
taught by nm*q (Gnanay ogr). Jupiter and yenusj oining in
Pisces( the terminal house, denoting final emanciption) wilr
endow the native with such supremek nowredge. rne rird of
thc ascendants imultaneouslyj oining the exahedM oon renden
the mind fcrtile enought o producek nowledgeo f one'l own sclf.
For one cannot attain the Lord without first knowing what hc
himselfi s. Materiarw ealth wilr arsoc ome to the nativc as l
by'product of the planetary configuration in quertion. So to
tay one will be spiritually and matcrially wealtby.

$di Flrr<rfiTti il*i ilqiffi r
r{qfnffi n* trrqq r qt riiq rr11rr



182 Brihat,porasara Hora Sastra
13. Shouldthe l0th lord be inthe ilth while the ltth

lord i5 in the ascendanat nd Venusi s in the l0th, the native
will be endowedw ith preciouss tones.

Notes : To wit the planets so disposeda s mentioned in
the sloka will confer a huge influx of material wealth on the
native.

it;afe*qt o{qrt sq}rqqqrfe{rt 
geurre ft! gui (r m{uQa}r ria rrlvtr

14, If the lord of the lOth is exalted in an angle or a
trine and be in the companyo f or in aspect o Jupiter,o ne will
be endowedw ith (worthy) deeds,

nfd qrrqnrst drmil wqfqil I
t;sf"rlqtt q.i qifi{fqm} wiE rrttrr

15. Shouldt he lOth lord be.int he ascendanatl ong with
the ascendanltord as the Moon is ia an angle or in a trine, the
nativewill be interested.ing ood deeds.

t{eqnqil q?i frq€qriqil r
wfti rrliglfr rfsal si;a<:u l q,rl

16. If Saturni s in the 10thalong with a debilitatedplanet
while the lOth from Navamsa ascendanti s occupied by a
malefic,t he nativew ill be berefto f (virtuous)a cts.

rfi ;nn<rFnti <rdt r{iRqt r
qtqqtor {gli 366ri fdpf,} rrie ttt\ett

17. One will indulgei n bad actsi f the l0th lord is in the
tth while the 8th lord is in the l0th with a malefic.

6frl {tqrrfret n{tt qrqdqi r
6{qritr{i nt r{riffqqrRriq rrqerr

18. Obstructionst o the native's acts will crop up if the
lOth lord is in fall, as both the l0th house from the ascendant
and the lOth from the 10th (i.e, 7th from the ascendanth) ave
malefic occupations.



Chapter2 2 r83
q,rirqnqi q?r' nA{t aftrd,qi r
w+ri t;nqntt qcfifrcQdl wi( rrterr
Rrid r{qrrcrdrrpi r6{{d{t wigr* r
l*rgwrr g€ uaifavfi* trliq  rr lorr
qrtferqqtrinlffuui t qrli il.i{i triigt r
FfGilEqeqqqi d rfirilqr ir] rriq n11rr

19'21.O OMBINATIONS FoR FAME..one will be endowed
with fame if the Moon is in the r0th while the r0th rura is iia
trine from the lOth and the ascendant rord is io u*uJ-t'.
angle. similar effectsw ill comet o passi f the ilth lord is in
the l0th while the r0th rord- is strong and be in asfeJ 
Jupiter.Famew ill to

cometo  the nativeir  tne rotr, roiJ-il 
the9 th ast he ascenda ii

rnotr di s in the tOtha ndt r,. u*o n ii
the 5th from the ascendant.

' Efr n{qcf itqii ieitqr &EilFet  r
mqndqmrffuqgq;r<fr q i l l t t l

22. o excellento f the Brahmins, thus havs been tord about
the effects of the l0th house in a brief manner. other related
effectsbe guessed!y  you basedo n the relationshipo f the lords
cfthe ascendanat nd ofthe l0th.

stst Flt$T$Tr?Tt6FTIslqtRrrR T| ; | 
Chryter2 2

Effects Of The Eleventh House
F[rqqririuqpqlq nqqrfq Gq]Eq tr
a1l-diq rerl ** cqtti rar g<ftulrr

I. O excellent of the Brahmins, I now explain effects
relating to the l lth house,t he auspiciousnesosf  which bhavaw ill
make one happy at all times.



184 Srlhat ParasoraE ora Sastra

ilqrfqd rnl cili faotq tesfet}q*: r
r[il{ .Gil gqls=e qqfqrrftsfqil  uitl

2. Shouldthe l l th lordbe inthe i l th i tsel for beinan
angleo r in a trine from the ascendanth, ere will be many gains.
Sinilarly if rhe llth lord isexalted, though in combustion,
there will be marryg ains.

Notes : The second line of the aboveverse deserveas 
propera pproach. .qatwifr means"althoughi n combustiono r
having lost rays io the Sun". The word ,,gTfr',m eaning
"although" in this contextd eterst he othcrwisep ossiblein terpr-
etationa s "Sun's Navamsao r Sun'sR asi" which of coursew ill
be an extremer endering.T o wit, the correcti mport is that even
thought he llth lord is combustb ut be in exaltationt he native
will gaia abundantly.

qrtd . qarf{rei uei *riRqt r
lfesrr Rftt rni geqrd fifitanq rrqrr

3. If the llth lord is in the 2nd while the 2nd lord is in
angle (from the ascendant)a long with Jupiter, the gainsw ill be
great.

qrtri fr{fr qri lltrrqeqGqt,
qEf"ri qigi sri r(afqfrc.ffm ttYll

4. If tho llth lord is in the 3rd while the llth is occupied
by a benefic,t he native will gain 2000 Nishkas in his 36th year.

Notes : ,'TTt" meanei n the Bhava or house in question,
i.c. the llth bhavaa nd not the 3rd bhava. Sincefqtt already
precreds,T ri to mean "in the 3rd house" will be redundant.

I fqq, (Nishlca)t hough meaning a gold coin was generally
taken lo indicate one Karsha or Suvarnao f 16 Mashas. This
also denoteg q c€rtain weight of gold in the hoary days. The
saget hus obviously hints at the opulenceo f the native in varied
measuresb y quantifying the resriltant Nishkas accordingt o the
merits of the planetary formationsa t birth.

talfffit ilqil'i {wq'6u6,
qnfiRri il wnci eqaniqfrerqni n{tl



Chapter 22 lg5

5. If the llth lord is conjujcta 'benefici n an angleo r in a
trine (from the ascendant),t he native will acquire 500 Nishkas
in his 40th year.

il$rt?rfi geti ui q?rqqfisi I
rrrrrT?{nili {i qasFlfaq} uiq rrqrr

6. The nativc will own 6000N ishkas if the I lth is occu-
piedb y Jupiter* hile thc 2nd and 9th arer espectivqltya ken over
by the Moon and Venus by position.

Frrsliq qt$ri q1i tFrTfrqqFqi I
rFrur.rrTfuq: aftql;riiTaTfrTi{a, rrotr

7. ShouldJnpiter,M ercury and the Moon be in the llth
from the llth (i.e. 9th from the ascendant)t he native will be
endowedw ith wealth,g rains,f ortunes,d iamondso, rnamentse tc.

il*{i ilitrrqtQ qfi{i qrqiqi r
aqfeeri I Hrq1cfgr Qefaeqq1v.i1q  rrer r

8. One will gain J000 Nishkasi n his 33rd year if the lltb
lord is in the ascendanat nd the ascendanlto rd is in the r lth.

Ht* ilqtrRld qr** qilrffli r
ftcqrma$r irgrnd uwrfa\ rtetr

9. If the ilth lord is in the 2nd as the 2nd rord is in the
llth, one will amassa bundantf ortunesa fter marriage.

ETEt ilTq<r|{rrQ ilii urqifrqil r
warnqrfinfqfEaqrqwriTc,' u{otl

10. If the rlth lord is in the 3rd as the 3rd rord is in the
l lth, one will gain wealth through co-born and be endowed
with excellento rnaments

il*ri n'tqis€ Er fe+ qrqsqFqi r
Fil qfiratisfn lq erfi: rriliri 1t I tl

ll. There will be no gainsi n spite of numerouse ffortsi f
the llth lord is in fall, incombustiono r be in the 6th/gth/12th
with a malefrc.



qet ErTrt$trcT$F[tsutttRtllT lf: 

Chapter 23

Effects Of The Twelfth House
BIqrE 6rrqqlqrq mqqfq qd faq tr
eqtd qrrvl* rqri rqJfirrtsfr ETnrtrl
aqi q qrreqlt qwrf .Erq€di|l 
*al aqqrfelq]u {qwqaiE iRqa: rrRrr
rql* rqd fiwid qr qmuqfrqqi{t r
fEaqnnrRqfr) fEeqqilirrqlqflT uitl
qruriqqq) faeqaq?qrtd{wqq: r
q<rsffqaiXe)f a* fE;nftr qm st: uytl

1-4. O Brahmin, now I tell you about the efrectso f the
l2th house. Thcre will[e expenseosn  good accountsif  the l2th'
lord is with a benefic,o r be in own houseo r be exaltedo r if a
benefic occupiest he l2th. One will own beautiful housds
and beds and be endowedw ith superior scenteda rticlesand

.pleasuresi f the Moon happenst o be the l2th lord and be
exalted orbe in own sign/Navamsao r in the llth/9th/Sth in
Rasi/Navamsa.T he saidn ativew ill live with rich clothesa, nd
ornaments,b e learned and lordly.

q{ Fd{r1dtqidscali{i flsGa* Rft r
dRqn: gftt tnH flilgqRqfm1 rrrrr
lqqrfEqqqft{qr;d fffiqruq r
u Q *;efen)q€arF: qRxqrstiUnr:lr rq nqtl

5-6. And if the t2th lord is in the 6th/gth or be in enemy,s
Navamsad, ebilitation Navamsao r in gth in Navamsao, ne wilt
be devoid of happinessf rom wife, be troubled by expenseas nd
deprived ofgeneral happiness. Ifhe be inan angli/trine,t he
native will begeta  spouse.



Chapter2 3 t87
qw Fr|ETrEq i{ , *ilEriqt: qRdtfrat r
qq trrTrfeqr\ ilRiq{ feqniil rr\err

7. Just as these effectsa re derivedf rom the ascendanitn 
regardt o the native,s imilar deductionsb e madea bout co-born
etc. fi'om the 3rd and other houses.

Nqtes : Hints are given here to know from the native,s
horoscopet he effects related to his co-born,u ncles etc. For
example, brother's financesf rom the 4th house( 2nd from the
3rd), brother'sm arriagef rom the 9th house (?th from the 3rd),
father'sh calth from the 2nd house( 6th from thc 9th), motheris
healthf rom the 9th (6th from the 4th), wife'ss pendingn ature
from the 6th house (i.e. l2th from the ?th) and so on and so
forth. Proceedingo n thbsel ines, we can see the possibility of
predicting many important eventsf or other relativesf rom the
native'sh oroscopeit self.

EwTqFTdqI: (iat: siqqg11qTq6rI: 
3rE'{Ilttiqilt: <ia1: qtAi r6qEI: Fr{irTl:c tl

_. 8. Planetsp lacedi n the visibreh arf of the zodiacw ilrgive
explicit results while the onesi n the invisibleh alf will 
secretr esults. "oir.,

Notes : visibre harfi s theharf of the zodiacw ithin a range
of 180degreesfr om the ascendant'sc usps eenb ackwards.T he
other half is invisible.

A planet in the visibleh alf of the zodiac will be more
potentiali n effectsw hile in the invisible half it is lessp otential
and unmanifest.

aqqeflrqal: {r6q}"qffiqige: r
ilA{iwdrfg* il+ qa{ nlq rrerr

9. If Rahu is in the l2th along with Mars, Saturna nd the
sun, thea ative will go to hell. similar effect wi[ occur if the
l2th lord is with the Sun.

Notes : The l2th houser elates to one,sf ate after death.
Whetherh e will reincarnate,o r attain infcrnal region or the
Lotus Feet of the Lord will have to be studied fri, ,n" f irt
house. In this connection,r efer to ch.26 of Horasaraa lso.



188 Brihat ParasaraH ora Sasto

.rrrrTqnqt Rlrt irfr{i tq}iq(tfti r
{qtrt qtl€ r1}u:1 qrq11i na: ttlott

10. If there is a benefici n the l2th while its lord is exalted
or is conjunct or aspectedby a benefic, one will attain frnal
emancipation.

6qi{i nqiq€ 6rtl qtq(qfiqt r
qHqeur ({64 inrQm;c< qil: ut ttl

ll. One will wanderf rom countryt o country if the l2th
lord and 12th housea re with malefics and be in aspectt o
tnalefics.

Gqt{i qttfnrri cqqf {qdgil |
qqqtor it€ TqenrE(s qt uiq rr11rr

12. One will moye in his own countryi f the l2th lord and
12th housearewith beneficsa nd be in aspectt o benefics.

Notes : In the previouss loka and the presento ne, clues
ere givent o know as to whether'onew ill be in his own placeo r
outsidet he native place. If the l2th house and its lord are
connectedwith beneficso, ne will progressin  his own placew hih
he will wanderhither and thither /without progress)if  l2rb lord
and l2th housea re spoiltb y malefics.

qi t;arfei1li $q}t qqFqil I
rlsr{6er (TrXTFil: q$gRr€infiq utltl

13. Earningsw ill be throughs inful measureisf the l2rh is
occupied by Saturn or Mars etc. arid be not aspectedb y a
benefic.

qqfi rqq{rfuTQ.qti cudgf r
!ggiof {qqil sq{llr{qc{qr lltYll

14. If the ascendantl ord is in the l2th while the l2th
lord is in the'ascendanwt ith Venus,c xlrcas€sw ill be on religious
grounds.



3tg fl?[qr$fltgrtTrTl:t Rvtl

Chapter2 4.

Effects Of The Bhava Lords
ttrlqi qr{i tqgqqFl nefer{t r
T{t{t qsqqldq fAqTqTq qrr}sfr il ttltl

I. EFFECTS OF ASCENDANT LORD IN VARIOLIS
HOUSES (uptos loka1 2) : Shouldt he ascendanlto rd be in the
asecndanti tself, the native will be endowed with physical
happiness( i.e. good health) and prowess. He will be intelli-.
gent,f ickle-minded, will have two wives and will unite with
other females.

Notes : The position of the ascendant lord in the
asctndanti tself will maket he nativef earlessa nd longlived.

iriri qri ilq} qnrqn rfisa: g<il r
{{ita} q{f*wr'it ruERrJqi{dl:R tl

2. If the lord of the ascendanti s in the 2nd, he will be
gainful, scholarly, happy, endowed with good qualities, be
religious,h onourablea nd will havem any wives.

Notes : The native having the ascendanlto rd in the 2nd
housew ill faceobstaclesin  obtaining progeny and thus he will
be left with a longingf or issuesH. e will further becomew ealthy
through his own efforts.

tntd €qt crtn: feqger-vun{l t
(lffiqg *. ndt GqTmq ftqrE qdt rrlrt

3. If the lord of the ascendanits  in the 3rd, the native
will equala lion in valour,b e endowedwith all kinds of wealth,
be honourablew, ill havet wo wives,be intelligenta nd happy,



190 Brihat parasaraH ora Sastra

Notes : Shouldt he 3rd houscc ontaint he ascendanlto rd,
onewill be equalt o a king, respectebdy  othcrsand will indulge
in unnaturalm ethodso f sexuagl ratification.

irrid gqn EIFt: fqqnq{ctF+c:r 
irgrrftrtr: $rdt {sr6qnqf}E{il: tlYll

4. trft he ascendanlto rd is in the 4th, the nativew ill be
endowedw ith paternala nd maternalh appinessw, ill havem any
brothers,b e lustful virtuousa nd charming.

Notes : With the ascendantl ord in the 4th house, the
nativei s of a nobled escent. He will prosperb y his own efforts.
He will be ambirious and beautiful. prosperity will come to
him easily. He will evere njoy physicafl elicity.

flfiqi gfri wdt: qffit<ri q qEqqq I
qqq$TiqqnTr* rffiqr{l ft}d} {qrnq: nul

5. lf the ascendanlto rd is in the 5th, the nativew ill have
mediocre progenic happiness,w ill lose his first child, be
honourableg, ivent o angera nd be deart o king.

qfi{i rlG6i tilil} lqwtw[aetwe: r
qrqr6t {rlrir:.  {til q'}rqEfiEfqq&rfr trr

6. If thea scendantlo rd is in the 6th and relatedt o a
malefict he native.willb e devoid of physicahl appinessa,n d will
be troublcdby encmiesif  therei s no benelica spect.

Notes:  The ascendantlo rd going to the 6th housew ill
mar the prospectso f health. However,f or Scorpioa ndT aurus
ascendant, it will be a felicitous augury for freedom from
diseases.

The 6th houseposition of LagnaL ord in .generawl ill give
abundantw ealtha nd respecat part 'status. 

from royal There is,
however,a possibilityo f more than one marriageo r losingt he
spouseearly.

qri{i qcil* qrt rrut arq ? dtqfa r
qtsaal aRa) an fq<eill ar 1fisfr ar uetl



Chopter 24 l 9 l
7. If the ascendanlto rd is a nralcfica nd be in the 7th, the

native'sw ife wilr not rive (rong). If the praneti n questiorbi e a
benefic,o ne will wandera imlesslyf,a cep enurya nd be dejected.
He will alternativelyb ecomea  king (if the saij planct i, ,i.oog).

ilivissaqi srra: fqufEqTfq{rrcqr : 
1t,fl qt* q€T*dl qilt ? trr{T{q:u cll

8. If the ascendanlot rd is in the gth, the nativew ill be an
accomplisheds cholar, be sickly,:  th.ievish,b e givent o much
lnger, be a gamblera nd will join others'w ives.

Notes : The only good effecto f the ascencranrto rrl being
in the 8th house is one,sa cademica ccomplishmentT. position h

w 
is

ill causeB alarishtao r child mortality. The native,s
h_ealth-riliblle p oor. I{e will be a repository of misfortunes.
He will s€em any deathsi n the family to his grief. His married
life will be a herl. I{e wilt be a profligate and wil incur il-
famea nd disrepute, penury will everb e after nim.

In caseo f Aries and Libra ascenclantt,h is approach for
evil resultss hould be avoidecal nd resultsd eclareda fter further
ecanningth e radix.

qti* $rTrqi ailt) gtTTqEIEaIE;t(,Ft$IT: 
ftrugw-a: qe.qtrc'| Erg"uifa: nQtr

9. If the ascendanlto rd is in thc 9tlr, ttrcn ative
- o w f rtunate, il l be

deart o pcople,b e a dcvoteco f Sri Vishnu, be skilful,
eloqucntin  speecha nd be enrlowcdw ith wife,s onsa nd wealth.'

Notes:  One will gain abundantlyfr om hisf ather. Everv
undertakingo f his will be fruitful. He will be well-disposetdo 
hisc o-born, Thesea re additionalr csultso f the ascendantl ord
occupyingtt re9 th housc.

f,QS q{r} etrr: frqv}<aanFqar : 
TTqrFr*q i €qta: sflfqacq} q dqrq:t tloll

10. If the ascendanlot rd is in the lOth,t he nativew ill be
endowedw ith paternalh appiness,r ol,al honour (or patronage),
famea mongm ena nd will doubtlesslhya v.es elf-earnewd ealth.



lg2 Brihat Parasara Hora Saslra

Notes : The lOth house occupiedb y the ascendantl ord
denotcso btainmento f co-born. The native wil! possesasm bi-
tions and will prosperi n his pursuits.

qfli qrqi iilGt: tRt qnRfHF.til: I
qqfri:t aqftrdtrr$r qRErqfitta:l l t tll

l l . I f t h e a s c e n d a n t l o r d i s i n t h e l l t h , t h e n a t i v e w i l l
alwaysb e endowedw ith gains,g ood qualities,f 36e nnd many
wives.

ttri{i gtlrltrtq€* l6dt<afaafeat: 
rqciqdt qrlrlal {q1{q}rrqfqi tttRtt

12.If the ascendanlto rd is rn the l2th and be devoido f
benefica spect/conjunctionth, e native will be berefto f physical
happinett,w ill spendu nfruitfully and be givent o much anger'

N o t e s : I f t h e a s c e n d a n t l o r d i s i n t h e l 2 t h , t h e n a t i v e ' g
life will not be prosperous. He will be addicted to gambling'
Itrieving, debauchiry and other vices' He will expend
wastefullY.

qt{i ilii cnil: g?ilFl ua€{il: l'

Serql6oEt[: r6ITIt targr: q('FIIiFEl lllll

13. EFFECTS OF 2ND LORD IN VARIOUS HOUSES
(upto sloka 24) : lf the 2nd lord is in the ascendantt'h e native
witt ue endowedw ith sonsa nd wealth,b e inimical to his family'
lustful,h ard-hearteadn d will do othersj'o bs'

Notes : One will be fraudulent and will face financial
upheavalsw ith the lord of the 2nd occupying thc asccndant'
Tiese evil effectsw ill not wholly apply to Capricorn ascendant,
but with somem odifications.

rl{i uii qra} qqqq l{i1a: t
frqrqT FgqIqT Itt {aqta: cErFItl l lYll

14.I f the 2nd lord rsi n the 2nd, the nattvew ill be wealthy,
proud, will havet wo or more wivesa nd be berefto f progeny'



Chapter 24 193

cft{i sEt !ft* ffit tRwl gft t
w{tq}{t {qras qqtqrEl }{frqq:lltttt

15. If the 2nd lord is in the 3rd, the native will be
valofous, wise, virtuous, lustful and miserly-all these when
relatedt o a benefic. If relatedt o a malefic, tho native will be a
heterodox.

Notes : Should the 2nd lord be in the 3rd house, tlre
native will be ill-related to femalesand will earn through proc-F
tutes. If a malefic is related to the 2nd lord in the 3rd, tho
personc oncernedw ill not be God'fearing and will have dirty
conduct.

uin q{Hrqaqqt}ffi: t
gnln figt cd=i qqg* Ttl siE lltqll

16. If tho 2od lord is in the 4th, tha aative will acquire ell
kinds of wealth.' If the 2nd lord is.exalted and be cotdunot
Jupiter,o ne will be equalt o a king.

Notes : Thc placemento f the 2nd lord in the 4th will aleo
produce a heterodoxa nd one of questionablec haracter'

The exaltation of the 2nd lord in the 4th applies only to
Libra ascendant. obviously the sagesuggestst hat the exaltation
of Mars in the company af Jupiter (in debilitation) in the 4th
housew ill prove extremelyf avourable for a Libra native confe-
rring near-iegalhood. It is also not unmeaningful to conclude

F that the 2nd lord exalteda nd joining Jupiter becominga  good
omen for anYa scendant.

qt{i sc$frc€{ iltr qqqqfl{f,: t
uqlqsii{itqtrq qT{e d-qnr uft ttl utt

l?. If the 2nd lord is in the 5th the native will bc wealthy'
Not only thc native, but also his sons,w ill be intent on earning
wealth.

Notes : The 2nd lord going to the 5tt house will make
oue resortt o trickery. His family life will not be hap.py' He
will not be kind to others. He will be very lustfula nd will bc
prone to lose a child PrematurelY.



t94 Brilut Parqsara lfora Sastra

qii RgqrrFi q'i {11il ur{ |
ad rr1* Ufqfer*teq{r1 qte tr tqtt

18. If the 2nd lord is in the 6th along with a benefc the
native will gain wealth througb his cnemies;i f be with a.male0c,
therew ill bc loss through enemiesa part from drutilation of
shanks.

Notes : There will be severel oss of wealth through thofts
and servants. He will have defects of privities. These are
further effectsofthe 2nd lord occupyingt he 6th house.

qAri Wtt arf,: IRrmqaI fqqn t
qtqfen. e ts qrqt ir qftrqTfqufll l t ett

19. If the 2nd lord is in the 7th, the native will be addicted
to others' wiveaand be a doctor If d malefic is relatedt o the
raid placement by conjunciion or by aspect, the native's.wife
will (also)b e of questionablec haracter.

No&s : The 2nd lord in the 7th house and relatedt o a
dirc mahfic will render the mother of the native being of
questionablec haractera ccording'to someh oary authors. How-
cver, the 4th houseand its lord deservea  special attention in the
context of mother's disPosition.

qiM qTil qftqfrrifa: r
qc*gd n\ nr{ ciwurqg<la Q tt1"tt

20. lt the 2nd lord is in the 8th, the native will be
endowed with abundant land and wealth. But he will have
limited marital felicity and be bereft of happinessf rom his
elderb rother.

qtd q{qrqd aFrqqa{t qg, l
fiFt qtdt qfrq{qq fi{u{twrftiq rlRtll

21. If the 2nd lord is in the 9th, the nativew ill be wealthy,
diligent,s kilful, sick tturing childhboda nd will later on bu lt"ppy
(i. e. healthy)a nd will visit shrines,o bservingr eligiousc odee tc.

qii 6{n iinr: s,{t qTil q qfien: t
q{nair{la: fr,--q g?qdfvnd: llRRtl



Chapter 24 t95

22. lt the 2nd lord is in the l0th,the native r,ll lbe
libidinous,h onourable,l earned,w ill havem anyw ivesa nd ouch
wealthbut be bereft of filial happiness.

qffr arqqr€Rt q?iilTqlTqFrftr: 
c<Hrrqdt qr{t dffarqwt .R:tlRllt

23. If the 2nd.lordi s in the l lth, the native,will lrovc all
kinds of wealth, be ever diligent, honouiable and famous'

Notes : The native will undergo miseriesd ue to ill-ileatrh
during childhood and with the march of time be *ill trc
endowed with healfh throughout, if the 2nd lord is in thc I lth
house.

qii sqqqrq{i ff{it qiqRt: I
tr(qtrTGT€TFT ateassq{ <Qr rlvn

24. lt the 2nd lord is in the 12th, the native r.'ill |r
adventurous, be devoid of wealth,a nd be interested in .rther'tg
wealthw hile his eldestchild will not keephim happy.

Notes : According to the saying "ffi aurqt-{rft T(6{-
ffifqil BTfir4:rdfs q;t aqTkr€vgfr Er
' 

Meaning that if the 2nd lord is in the l2th houscwi.! hvo
or more (favourable)planets,t he native will be ext'emely
wealtby. This is found to be a sound clue in actua! casrs.
Howcver,t he 2nd lord lonely in the l2th is bad for richcs,
lxcept in the caseo f Aries ascendant with Venusi n the l2th itr
high dignity.

rrrii . ((qrdti T?tqrfudfqf,q I
tqla: m6t wrfr @t*sfr dnrqql ll{lr

25, EFFECTS OF 3RD LORD IN I/ARIOAS H.)USES
(upto.sloka36): If the3rdlordisin the ascendantth mtivo
will have self-madew ealth, be disposedt o worship, be r;lqrrous
and be intelligent although devoid of learning.

. Notes : One will have a lean body with the as"'lndant
having the 3rd lord in it. He will have euch sexual lrst ti'at
cannot be subdued. He will be short-tempereda ,ud ill-dicpoeed
to others



196 Srihat Parasara Hora Sastra

fk*t qWAn s(nl fffia: r
criqt<nfr qdt a mEq(Tt'lqrftFlll6: llRqll

26. lf the 3rd lord is in the 2nd' the native will bc

corpulent, dcvoid of valour, will not makc much efforts' U".T'

ft"ppy and will bave an eye on otbers' wives and othen'wealth'

Notes : Should the 3rd lord be in the 2nd house'o ne will

r"sorito.rooatural sexual meanso f gratification' He will not
' show enthusiasmi n his undertakings'

(ti q6rdtri eqtc<q3nfi?FI t: 
urrg?g* tca qqqnFq llRell

n.lf the 3rd lord is in the 3rd' the nalive will be

.rOo*.J with happinessth rough co-borna nd will have wealth

-O **, bc chccrfula nd cxtremelyh appy:

qs?f r6fifii qA q uaige:I 
rtnq d ml gerrfrRt< (: llRqll

28. If the 3rd tord is in the 4th' thc nativew ill be b"ppy'

wcat[i anOi ntelligentb ut will acquirea  wickeds pouse'

qnFr qqwrfri gq gutigc:t 
Trqt ilq tTilt Ttr lSqgitirt llRe'tt

29. | t the3rd lord is in the5th, thenat ivewi l lhavesons '
If inthe procestsh e 3rdlordbec onjunctor

";;oilA;tod,"uitmto.,o ot. the nativew in havea  formidablew ife.

qtdqlf trAm sq{q{'Uufi |
qrgirq e{ it ilgil-{tfsq} ;t(: llQoll

30. I f the3rd lord is in the6th, thenat ivewi l l tbe in imica l
to nis c;'bora, bc afruent, will not be- well'disposcdo  his
nrrtcrnafu nclca nd bc dcar to his mAternaal unt'

Notcr r Thc studcnt'sa ttentioni s drawn to the statement
of the text, viz. qr$n*fcfr-rn: wbichh as been. 

any
without 

-i*r"*pii"n, renteredt o denotet he native's being "dear to

his msternala unt". At the samet ime, Srnkete Nirlhi while
;;;;;li"g on the 3rd lord'sp lacemenitn . thc 6th houseg ives



Chapter24 rn
an overt clue to tho native being fond of physicallp matiny with
his materaal aunt. One wonders whether sageP arasaracovcflly
points out to one and the samet hing. Possiblys o, for thc Sans'
krit expressioni s so flexible.

Fcat aeildt{i trq*qrrt ir<: I
rret g:d qd ar* qrqil rrse inq: ttlttt

31. If the 3rd lord is in the 7th, the native will bc intcr'
estedi n servlngt he king and be not happy duriog boybood but
at the end of his life.

Notes :' It is not a favourablei ndication to hsve an indcp
endentp rofession or businessw [en the 3rd lord is in thc '/th

house. The 7th denptes onc's public relationship' busincss
prospectsetc. and an evil lord is noJ welcomet here' As s
iesuft, the native will be destinedt o be in the employ of othors.

Further, this position will give a tendencyt o steal' Tho
native will incur a legal award like death'

ar6et (1-fldti ililqlt nt q\ t
{rqlltffi* q qtwflt TR*fq lllQtt

32. If the 3rd lord is ii the 8th, the native will be a thief'
wiliderive his livelihood servingo thers and will die at tho gatc
of royal palace.

iqf wq.dlahi Srg: {ffiqfqn: I
T{tfqqtq}{qRrct gelfrqqti{f: llllll

33. If the 3rd lord is in the 9th, the native will lack
paternhlbliss, will make fortunes through wife and will enily
progenic and other Pleasures.

' Notes : Although one rnay have fortunes and progpnic
happiness,o ne will unendingly feel miserable if the 3rd lord
occupi.s the 9th house. His father will be a contemptiblc
person.

{{t qcT€ild Enn: qriacrFqa't
fitSrfqfqf,Tq $Eefrqd <tr llQvll



i9p Brlhat Parasara Hora Saslra

Y, If {he 3rd lord is in the l0th, the nativew ill have all
kinde of happiness and self'made wealth and be intercstedi n
nrrrturlog wicked fcmales.

qTqt Tptdlxi Eqllti ilqil;r tttil |
W|alsft iqTfr fiAit qqtq6: 

. lllttt
35. If thc 3rd lord is in the llth, the native will always

gain in trading,b e intelligenta lthough not literate,b e adventu-
rous and will serveo thers.

Notec : One will have an emaciated body with the 3rd
lord's positioni n the I lth house.H e will incur misunderstan-
dingr with others and will not be a rvorthy friend'

qqd qqilut{i grri amgen;T:I 
frcr trer n\ g: t*fqqFqt<qcnn tllqll

'l2th, 
36. If the 3rd lord is in the the nativew ill spend on

cril dccds, will have a wicked father and will be fortunate
tbrough a fernale( or wife).

Notes : Thc 3rd lord going to the l2th will bestow every
happinessin  life. Yct the native will feel highly miserable'
This view is held bY RamadaYalu.

Thie phcement will futther spoil the prospectso f co-born.
If Man also joios thc eaid 3rd lord, sustenanceo f co'born will
bo doubtful.

qin utri ilnl fqsqgtft1fq?t: t
qfr<rqaritcfr rtrit: {a€nF?ir lllell

37. EFFECTS OF THE 4TH LORD IN VARIOU$
fOUSfS (upto sloka4S) : lf the 4th lord is in the ascendant,
the nativc will be eodowedw ith learning' virtues, ornaments'
bnds, conveyanceas nd matcrnal happiness.

Notet : As a result of the 4th lord comiog to occupy the
,rscendant,t be subject will acquire incomparable.l earning in
nrious branches. However, there is an element of risk of
lcing dcprived of one's ancestral properties. After leading
'.'rarricdl ife for somet ime, the native will give up worldly life
:od msy turn into an ascetic'



Chapter2 1 rte
qdi qiii qrf&r ql\{ft €ctuE"artrqfqf,a:'t,.r
F*qqQfr qr{t FAS 3q'FrFqil tlQetl

38. If the 4th lord is in tho 2nd, the native wltl enjoy
plcasuresa, ll kinds Qf wealth, family life and honour and be
adventurous. He wlll bc cunning in disposition'

Notes : Tho 2qd house tcnanted by the 4th lord will
bring abundant gains ftom mother and maternal relatives. Thc
*oth., of the nativc will bc able to recei.re great help from her
Uroit".sUnA sisters. The subject will join evil conpany and
face somer isks. He will.build up self.earnedw oaltha nd his lust
for lucre will never be subdued.

gtiri tqt. trral Rnl _ Safga: t
q<r<]sqg{ oft qril rqtqrftfqf,?rr{ lllell

3g.I f thc4thlord. ls int le3rd,thenat ivewi l lbgvaloroug.
He will iave sgrvants, 6e liberal, virtuous and charitablea nd
wlll possess elf-earnedw eelth. He will be free from disoases.

ggi gcqrdsi q;* s{q'flfi{f,: l'
egt: firr<tl mfi f,IFrlll q*fqq: gd tivot t'

40. If the 4th lord is in the 4th, thc native will be a
ninister and will possesasl l kindso f wealth. He will be skilful'
yirtuous,h onourabh,learnedh, appya nd be welldisposetdo  hic
spouse.

qd{i g?qn€i gel -aisnfqq: r
: fqqqqt} git rr{t €ttrtfffikttqla llvtll

4 t . I f t h e 4 t h l o r d i s i n t h e 5 t h , t h e n a t i v e w i l l b e h a p p y
and belikea bi all. He will be devoted to Sri Vishiru' be

virtuous, honourablea nd will haves elf-earncdw ealth'

{dqi Rgqnri mg: qeffire: t
ir*it *.rgwrtt q airqrintlq 3f,ilr llYRll

.' 42. If the 4th lord is in the 6th, the nativew ill be devoid
of mGrnal happiness, be given to aoger, be a thief and a

coojor". (or maircian), be independent in action and be ill-

disposed.



2N Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

Notss : The native will be brought up by another female
in the place of his mother. He will be carelessa bout his own
matters. He will have litigations on account of properties.
His mother will be sickly in constitution and be a sourceof
worry to thc farnily members. He will not be welldisposed
toward his mother. These are additional effects for the 6th
housep lacemento f the 4th lord in a nativity.

qc{i sH* qrd edfirilsq6ffi: r
fqrrfqaqniqrtt R'Htrri {fiq1 n\ rrvlrr

43. If the 4th lord is in the 7th, the native will be endowed
rith a high degreeof education,w ill sacrificeh is patrimony and
be akin to the dumb in an assembly.

Notes : When the 4th lord occupies the ?th house,t he
personc oncernedw ill not enjoy paternal properties. He may
cither loseor sacrificet he same. He rvill not be a householder
for a long timc aqd will give up his family burdenss oonero r
later ar a husband and as a father. Though he will achievea 
great degreeo f education,h e will be unable to express himself
bcfore a group of men.

qdri t;q.flqrt lqrf<qe<fca:r 
ffi: qd q+{F,i qta: fi{tqfiq} Riq rrvvrr

44. lf the 4th lord is in the gth the native will be devoid
of domestica nd other comforts, will not enjoy much parcntal
happinessa nd be equal to a neuter.

Notes : The 4th lord's relegation to the gth housew iil
afrect thc progcnic ability of the native and he wiil not be able
to carnally satisfyh is spouse. His happiness in houreboldl ife
will not bc apprcciable;s omep roblem or the otfer will accost
him. His educationwill face many an obstacre. His childhood
will be with many difficulties.

lqgqwfr q$lTrqTsAl.TtwqlF Rq iilFl: cqFriiaqHiftsgqq::  tr
t{rnifr gsit qr* naq u,{q<lrfiqarr: vtrr

45, lt thc 4th lord is in the 9th, the native nill be deart o
onc and all, be devoted to God, be virtuous,h onourablea nd
endowedwith every kind of happiness.



Chapter2 4 201
\ \

gq{I q*wrqfi fiwffiql ad qia r
t(TTqfr q€Tqql qqqlrit fqeFfi: nYqu

. 46. If the 4th lord is in the 10th, the nativew ilt eqioy royal
honours, be an alchemist, be cxtremely pleased, witl enjoy
pleasuresa nd will conquer his five senses.

Notes : Onc will be professionally happy and prosperous
with the 4th lord in the lOth house. He wilt havc abundant
self-madep roperties. He will, however,l ack maternalh appiness
if the 4th lord in the saidh ousei s not happilyplaced.

{aHr ilqi Endl ga*rrrailka: r
sil* tqqq itril rtqsroi (t: ty\etl

47. lf the 4th lord is in the I lth, .the nativew ill have fear
of secretd iseaseb, e liberal, virtuous, charitablea nd helpful to
others.

Notes : Some say that the l lth househ aving the 4th lord
will ensuref reedom from diseascsw hile our sagea ttributoss ecret
diseases(l ike venerealaffiiction or any other diseasesc aused by
physicalu nion). Apparently the sage does not prefert he 4th
lord (lord of happinessg) ettingr clegatedt o the llth (the 8th
from the 4th).

q€i qqqteti Wfrqcqfqd: t
ffdl Sriedt qa: qi{TssFrc.Rcrfi{nfvi:c tl

48. If the 4th lord is in the l2th the nativew iil bedevoid
of domestica nd other comforts, will havc viceeand be foolish
and lndolent.

Notes : Complete absense of happiness, particularly
paternal, will come to pass. One will be bereftof masculine
vigour. His mother is of doubtful character. These ar€
additional effeets for the 4th lord being in the l2th house,
accordingt o classicalw orks.

qffi qr{n qrd} ft6r{ grqeiFea: r
6EqT q€FfqR{q q1Eqrtr$('[,: uYQ.rl



202 . brihat Parasara Eora Sas|,rra

49. EFFECTSOF THE SthL ORD IN VARIOAS HOASES
(upto sloka60) : lf the 5th lord isin the ascendantt,h e nativo
will be scholarly, be endowed with progenic happinessb, e a
miser, be crooked, and will stealo thers' wealth.

'i Notes : The native having the 5th lord in the ascendant
will be of.unsteatlyd isposition.' Though progenich appincssis 
denoted by our text, thcre are other exponentsw arning of an
unpleasants ituation in respecto f one of the native's sons.

qe{t uti cnl qgg* qrlFqt: t
S€rsrlqol qrEt r*fqq: qqm {fr tttott

50. If the 5th lord is ln the 2nd, the nativew ill havem any
sonsa nd wealth,,be a pater farnilias, bo honourable,b e attached
to his spouSea nd be famousi n the world.

Notes : Maharshi Parasarap raisesvery highly the place-
ment of the 5th lord in the 2nd houseand attributes worldwilde
f;rme for the native. It ii actually true in the oeseo f Smt'
Indira Gandhi,P rime Minister of India, whosem ap of birth is
furnished below : born on lgth Novemberl 9l7 (Monday)a t
2317h rs IST at Allahabad8, 185425N28.

Jup (R) Ketu
l 5-0 l s34

Asc2 E'05
2r-48

Moon Mars
5-35 t6-23

en 20-57 Merc
Rahu l 3 - l l
I  0-34 Sun4-04



Chapte2r 4 20?

Note the lord of the 5th Mars occupyingt he 2nd housc in
Leo. The nativity has a number of splendidp lanetaryi nfluences
apart from tbis. As indicatedb y sageP arasara,t he 2nd house
p-osition of the 5th lord gave her a world-widep osition and
honour for a very long numbero fyears.

One can notice that the native will haveample opport-
unitieso f shiningb rilliantly, whethero r not on a world level,
with the 2nd hor:se placement bf ths 5th lord in strength and
dignity. Should there further be sufficient Raja Yogas etc. as
in the caseo f the examplec hart give4, the nativew ill be suret o
hit the headlineso f the world press.

The position of the 5th lord in the 2nd will further cuase
asthmaa nd catarrh and the native will have infected lungs. Hc
will becomep roud owing to his possessions.

{N €d wti qTqA *T<fsq: I
fqnqra rs{{q T{firrifaTil: qiil U{ltl

51. If the 5th lord is in the 3rd, thenativew ill be attachc*
ed to his co-born, be a talebearer and a miser,a nd be always
interestedin  his own work.

Notes : The nativb will further be an,imposter. He will
not be helpful to anybody in any rnanner.

qhi qqqmFt qd rrqqeffire: r
ntitgla: ls]Erq qr*Ms{fl !e: tt{Rtl

52. If the 5th lord is in the 4th, the native will be happy,
-endowedw ith maternal happinessw, ealth and intelligence, and
pe a king or a minister or a preceptor.

Notes : A very long life will come to the native's mother.
The native will start acquiring prosperity, right from his youth.
He will also own a posh or beautiful house.T hesea re additional
effectst hat wifl come to passw ith the 4th househaving the Sth
lord in it.

qfun qilqlcrd qqr6.t g"qrl rr<:I 
g.rq|I fqes6Fq|:| {ltl

53. If the 5th lord is in the 5th, the qative will hava
progeny if related to a benefic;t here will be no issuesif  malefic



204 Brihat ParasaraH ora Sastra

is relatedt o the saidSthl ord placedin  5th. The 5th lord in 5th
will, howeverm, akeonev irtuousa ndd eart o friends.

qti ftgneQ gn: {r1qq} niq r
lmralsuar qTal rantaqalsqqltrt Ytl

. 54. If the 5th lord is in the 6th, the nstive will obtain such
sonswho will be equalt o his enemieso r will loset hem,o r will
acquire an adoptedo r purchaseds on.

Notes : Maharshi Parasarae nunciatesfo ur differcnt possi'
bi.litiesif  the 5th lord is in the 6th house.

1. Obtainings onst hat will be inimicalt o the native : The
6th housed enoteso ne'se nemies. The planeto ccupyingt he 6th
will signify the classo f enemy.5 th lord indicatessons, 9th lord
indicatesf ather, 4th lord indicates mother and so on and so
forth. Suchr elativew ill be inimicall o the nativec orresponding
to the rulershipo f the occupanto f the 6th house.

2. Loss of children : The 6th is the maraka sthanaf or
children as it is the 2nd from the 5th. Hence loseq f progenyi s
denoted.

3. Obtaining an adopted issue:  Normally .this occurs
when one is unablet o have progenyo f his own loins, or fails to
have living children. Point 2 abovea nswerst hp circumstances.

4. Purchaseo f a child : This is also likc adoptidn. Hence
it follows that the situation of the 5th lord in the 6th house
is not very desirable, of course.e xcepting Saturn for Virgo
ascendant.

It is also not advisable for a female to have her 9th lord
in the l0th housef rom the point of view of filial happiness.

sRi qtai qni 
'g'irfaq3$tll siuffia: r

stfqfii Gl: ll{tll
55. If the 5th lord is in the 7th, ihe native will bc

honourable,v ery religious, endowed'w ith progenic happiness
'and bc helpful to others.

Notes : With the 5th lord going to the ?th house, the
native will be tall in staturea nd will speako nly truth. He will
honestlys erveh is employer,a nd his dealingsw ill bc honest' He
will bc firm in diePosition.



Chapter2 4 20s
'q?qqr{€i

qtri gtrEqgTEflfrqat: 
t6prTcr11wt151sal:dt rr qc<frn: tt{qll

56. If the 5th lord is in the 8th,t he nativew ill nof have
muchp rogenich appinessb,e  troubledb y ccugha nd pulnonary
disordersb, e givent o angera ndb e devoido f happiness'

qili qrrqi g{'t q* qTa rnr} uiq t
€d qr r;ffiat q fqaqrd: 3n{lm: lttelt

57. If the 5th lord is in the 9th; the nativew ill be a prince
or equalt o him, will author treatises,b e famous and wiil shine
in his race.

Notes : The ptacemenot f the 5th lord in tbe 9th housei s
a good augury for writership, authorship, editorship and the
like. See the fgltowing horoscope of tho most venerable
JagadguruA di Sankaracbarya.

Sun
Merc
Ven

Ketu 
I

bl."r" note tbat the 5th lord is in the 9th in a houseo f
Jupiter. Mars is a favourablep lanet for Cancer ascendanta nd
iir Jispotitor himself is in a mystiqueh ouse( Aquarius) in aspect
to Saturn in exchange. This great person's philosophical expo'



296 Brihat parasaraH ora Sostra

sitionsi n an endeavour to re-stand Hinduism on firm grounds
are ofperenniali mportancea ndhis horoscopes hould servea
perfect exampleo f our aboverule.

I haveg ivena nother horoscoped ealing with authorshipo n
page 88 of . "Doctrines of Suka Nadi-RetoldD which is as
u n d e r :

.Borno ri 21.5.194a4t  1902h rs War time,l3N40,7gE20.

Merc
Yen Sat

Moon
+

Rahrr
Mars
Jup

The nativeh asa uthoreda  number'o f bookso n a subject
dear to his heart. Mark the Sth lord Jupiter in exaltation in
the9th.

Apart from the 5th lord being in the 9th for fame via
authorship, the ?th house having the 5th lord witl equalty
contribute to suchachievements.S ee the horoscopeo f late
Sri C. G. Rajan on the nert page.

The birtir data are : born 5th July 1894AD as taken from
his prefaceg iven to 'Cancer Ascendant Volume' of Saptarshi
Nadi seriesof Madras Govt. Publications. Sri C. G. Rajan
did a great service to the lovers of astrologyb y bringing out
dozenso f volumeson astrologyi n Tamil and English. He had



Chapter 24 207

also edited a couple of volumesi n Tamr'l of SaptarshiN adis on
bghalf of the Orientel Manuscripts Library, University of
Madras. He had as well produced a couple of astronomical
treatisesl ike SiddhantaR aja Siromtni (Graha Kuanam) contai-
ning planetaryt ablesf rom 3200 BC to 3100 'tbe 

AD. Note 5th
lord in the 7th in his natusa long with Venus.

g*i {rcqqrqrq qqq}q} A qtqil I
ufugeftit q qn{ftfffi* riq rrtrrr

58. I f the5thlordisinthe l0th, thenat ivew i l l  enjoya
Rajayogaa nd various pleasuresa, nd be very fbmous.

Notes : For enjoying a superior degreeo f material bene_
fits like wealth, posltion, fami etc. th;sth lord is the best
placedi n the lOth house than elsewhere. This one position
with sterling quatities will equal many Rajayogas.I t is a pre-
requisiteo f course tha! in such a placementth e 5th lord is
very close to the meridian, if not exactly on the meridian,
preferablyw ith exaltation or such other dighities. If he is placed
in an enemy'sh ouseor sucho ther affictionst ormentingh im, he
will prove-rathera dverset han a Rajayogam aker,



?08 Brihat Parasara Hora'Sastra

gti ilqi qtfr ftsrqR q?rqrerr:I 
qq'[,at rr{1aq} Eg"Er-{rFril:u tetl

59. Ifthe 5ttr lord is'in the lltb, the nbtivew ill be
learned, dear to people, be an author of treatises,b e very
skilful and be endowedwith manys onsa nd wealth'

Notes : The 5th lord's stationi n the l lth housew ill keep
one free from misfortunesa nd unhappiness. He will be of
helpingn ature. His academica chievementws ill be abundant'
He-wiil be happy in respecto f his children, but the said llth
houses houldb e a friendly signf or the 5th lord (vider ute 48,
p. 96 of Doctrlncso f SukaN adi-Retold). lf the 5th lord' is
inimically placed in the I l'th house, for exampleit re Sun in
Aquarius in the l lth in the caseo f Aries ascendant,t he progeny
wiit be inimical to the native. However, obtainment of progeny
will not be obstructedi n that casee ven.

qt{i qqqrl(t cna: 5"{q}&aa: t
{flg"{il {rsql flffi5"TGrfrsaeil|  lQoll

60. If the 5th lord is in the l2th, the native'will be bereft
of happinessf rom his own sons, will' have an adopted or
purchaseds on.

Notes : The placemenot f the 5th lord in the l2th in
terminalh ousew ill causev ariousk inds of miseriesin lhe matter
of children. One may not obtaina  child at all, or may incur
inimical relations with his own child. Adoption will surely
domet o passi f Saturno r Mercury ruling the 5th is in the 12th.
In other cases, the disposition of Saturn/Mercury/Jupiterw ill
havetobe secn whilethe 5th lord is in the l2th. Further
grave'd efectsw ith the 5th lord in the l2th are difficultiesi n
digestiona nd abdorninal disorders.

q6Bi qr{t wt} ttrrq fifaiga: t
qrqrnddt nr;it eqit gur{q i{: llqtll

61. EFFECTS OF THE 6TH LORD IN VARIOUS
HOUSES (upto slokaT2) ; If the 6th lord is in the ascendant,
the nativew ill be sickly,f amous,i nimical to his own men,rich,.
honourablea, dventurousa nd virtuous.



Chaptcr 24 2Og
Notes : The 6th l_ordin  thc ascendinsgi gnw iil bring various

diseasetso  the native. He wilt incur adveisee ffectsin  th! mattei
of acquisitiono f progeny.

Venus in Taurus ascendantw ill plrrticularlyg ive benefic
resultsi n full meesurea s stated. He wilt also not stall obtain-
ment of children. There will, however,b e mored aughterst han
sons,w hile the first child wilt be a male.

qcii qnsmr€{ Frqet ffirrc: I
qrldl gtfi EtffTI sqr{fi6: fiirr lqRtl

62. If the 6th lord is in the 2nd, the nativew ill be advcn-
turous, famousa mongh is racemen,w ill live in arien countrieg
(or places), be happy, be a skilful speaker and b" ;*;t;
interestedin  his own work.

Notes : The native wil further be skilful in dearingw ith
hoary lore. His financialp ositionw ill be somewhast haky. He
will enjoy good health.

q6d{i RErr: srti|: Tlfi fqfiErqil: I
qrrt rr.Tqq€f,|rr ttilt{*trt{Flfi: ilql.tl

63. If the 6th rord is in the 3rd, the nativew iil be givent o
anger,be bcreft of courage, inimicar to ail of his co-birn and
will haved isobedienst crvanrs.

Notes : Thc 3rd lrouse containing the 6th lord wilt not
servet he nativew ith intelligencea t alr times. To wit, he will
be partly deprivedo f benefitsd ue to his intclrigence. He wilt
also not be steadyi n disposition.

qcii g<tqrqrt {rg: gcfaafwar: 
T{Fal fq{r afl qqfq*sfafqtTErru qvtl

64. rf the 6th rord is in the 4th, the nativew il be devoid
of maternal happinessb, e intelligent, be a talebearer,b . j;l;;
fickle-mindeda nd very rich.

adw: gafi q{q qq il{q fffr&s,q r
{qar gafn*ra gr{t T{rd eltfiqa: nq{rr



2t0 Brihat Parasaar  llora Sastra

65. If the 6th lord is in the 5th, the native will have
f,uctuatingf inances. He will incur enmity with his sons and
friends. He will be happy,selfisha nd kind.

aGi f<gurci it Tffiileragirn 1
- qdi: q qil i* g,il qs{ rflf{q{ nqqtl

66. If the 6th lord is in the6 th, the nativewill havee nmity
with the group of his kinsmenbut be friendly to others and will
enjoy mediocreh appinessin mattersl ike wealth.

Notes : The native will enjoy happinesso f conveyances
and bc free from diseases. His life span will also be consider-
abiy lengtby. Theseare additional effects for the 6th lord in
the 6th itself.

qldn {r<qrqsf wil ilrgdfvFa: I
rffftnq glrqq qr.it wtrit r<i1C llqell

67. If the 6th lord is in the 7th, the nativewill be deprived
of happiness through wedlock. He will be famous,v irtuous,
bonourable,a dventurousa nd wealthy

Notes : Apart from denying marital happiness,t he 6th
lord's occupancyo f thc 7th house will dissatisfyt he native
in the matter of progenY. His own spousewill be his sworn
enemy.

qrtiseent qrdl idt rrrf{tfqqnq r
{(ac.ntkflrdt s r(itr(1als(fq: il(sll

68. If the 6th lord is in the 8th, the native wilt be sickly,
inimical,w ill desireothers'w ealth,b e interestedin  others'wives
and bo impure (or degmded).

Notes : It is not good for one's purity of character if the
8th housei s occupiedb y the 6th lord. The native will be ever
incurring enmity with othersa nd be not happy. He will have
I Srecne ye on others' learninga nd an eyeoJ others' wealth'

qdi qrqn qrrr qiltoqrqrqfq'fil t
luq$i qfuarfa:. lalqqfara qTqft tqett



Chaptcr 24 Ztl
69. If the 6th lord is in the 9th, the nativew ill trade

wood i n
and stones (crSFI also means poison), and will have

fluctuatingp rofessionaflo rtunes.
Notes : The Maharshi seemst o suggestth at one will deal

in building construction materiar by sa1-ingt hat one wiil seil
wood and stonesw ith the 6th tord in the 9th. It wilr furthei
causeu psa nd downsi n one'sl ivelihood.

1q1a6lt6{I E{rrrtt qFti rril.T: 5nR13: r
Elwril:rE ftg*rilr fqil a gd {AE ueotl

70. If the 6th rord is in the l0th, the nativew iu be wen-
known amongh is men, rvill not be respectfuilyd isposedt o ni,
father and will be happy in foreignc ountries. He will 
gifted be a

speaker.
Notes : one wiil be greatryv alorous and rearnedin  Sastras

(or' ancient lore). There will be litigations on account of
ancestralp roperties. Dutifulness and living in foreign ptace
will also come to pass. These are in furthiran". to ti. oge;s
viewsf or the placemento f the 6th lord in the l0th house.

qcedi{ii qFTrrt$i tri q6t: {q* tl?crFlqrX 1
yrqq Hr6dtw rdtf n;gg"g<ifs{il:n sltl

7t. If the 6th.lord is in the lith, the nativew ill gain
wealtht hrough his cnemies *iff

b, 
-

e virtuous, adventurousa na 
be somewhabt erefto f progenich appiness.

Notes : One will, to somee xtent,b e happya nd to yet 
e:rtgnt some

be unhappy if the 6th lord occupiest he I lth house.
This is in regardt o progeny. There is also a view that 
position this

c an wholly deny acquisitiono f a child.
qsdd aqqqrqqQ Err€ E{Tgia €El I
fqaqiq'l wiaqnl dtqt{ng rFrT:u sRtl

72. If the 6th lord is in the l2th the nativew ill always
spend on vices, be hostile to learnedp eoplea nd will 
living torture

beings.
Notes:  The nativew ill be of questionabl

will ever me.o rality 
be intent and

on deriving, .iuui 
female l. ftr"rur., iio,n"od.i

ass wel



2t2 Brihat ParasaraH ora Sastra

Eri{i qrdtl snfi: qT{ri{ FFqe' I
gGEl fqqffurlsu'l:<}i lt} qTiltwfiqa: llsllt

73. EFFECTS OF THE 7TH LORD IN VARIOUS
HOUSES (upto slokaSt) : lt thc 7th lord is in the ascendant,
the nativew ill go to others'w ives,be wicred, skiiful, devoido f
oourage-anda ffiicted by windy diseases.

Notes : The native will not be firm in his wordsand
actions. He will impart couragein  others although he himself
will be bereft of courage. So say learneda strologeisi n the
coutexto f the ascendanbt eingo ccupiedb y the 7th lord.

{riri rq,i qrd} lrgr*fu: qqfiea: t
mdqraarFarq rftdq{f ir rFFr: llleYll

74. lf the 7th lord is in the 2nd, the nativew ill have
many wives,w ill gain wealtht hrough his wife and bd procras-
tinating in nature.

Notes : This position will further give corrupt character
making one addicted to many women' He will lose his wife
carly. His prosperityw ill ascendw ith his marriage.

{Tiri fiti ilil qirqtq} A qr;R: I
rErfqasmt g* aimq f*tfq vitqfal le{ll

75. lf the 7th lord is in the 3rd, thc nativew ill facel oss
of childrena nd sometimesw ith greatd ilficulty thersw ill exist a
living son. There is also the possibilityo f birth of a daughter
(who will sustain).

Notes : Three salient features in regard to progenya re
denotedb y sageP arasarafo r thc 3rd housep lacemenot f the 7th
tord. Firstly, losso f chrldreni n general. Secondly,p ossibility
of (rarely)a cquiringa  daughter. Lastly,n o possibilityo f having
a living son. In fine, probablya  femalec hild will live long to
keept he nativeh appy, while male children will passa waya s
they are born.

{Tiri gqrrr+€t ErFrI ?nTq sfr q{r I
rqd ttqfqql dtnq uqteqtar<)ngq u\eqll



Chapter24 213
76. lt the 7th lotd is in the 4th, the wife of the native

will not be under his control. He will be fond of truth, bc
intelligenta nd religious. He will sufferf rom dentald iseases.

Notes : A disobedienwt ife follows the 4th house position
of the 7th lord. This is Mabarshi's instruction. However,
Ramadayalustatesi n this context thus, qffilfrflfr{rtffrrdr ilqqfqt
meaningt hat the native'sw ife will brilliantly shinew ith chastity
or devotiont o husband. Lord Rama's sacredh oroscopei s a
classice xamplehavingC ancera scendantw ith Saturo, the ?th
lord, in the 4th-of course in exaltation. I do not possess
event he slightestc ompctenceto  sayt hat the Maharshi,sv iew is
untenable..

'In 
this context, however,I  quote a horoscope from

"SaptarshNi adi" (Volumef or Tiurus ascendant). The whole
Nadi wasa  product of intcrcourseb etweenf our groupso f sages,.
eachg roup havings evengreat sagesi,n  the benign presencJo f
Parvati, a consort of Lord Siva. h, the seminaro n Taurus
asce.,dantP, arasaraw asa lso a participant. The horoscopei n
particrrlar( bearingN o. 25 in thc original volume)w asa nalysed
by Parasarah imselfa s one of the sevenR ishisi o dialogue. See
the nativity :

Merc
Sun
Ven



211 Brihat ParasaraH ora Sastru

Dealing with the above horoscope, Parasarad escribes
lhe native's spouse thus : "she will be somewhat short-
tcmpered. Shew ill deliver auspiciousw ords. She will be dear
to her husband. Shew ill live begettingf amef rom all the four
directions. She will be fortunate. She will be freef rom any
blemish( or Dosha). Shew ill be dark in complexion. She will
feed the needy. In beauty, she will be akin to Rathi (the
extremelyc harmings pouseo f the extremely ch'armingC upid,
the Hindu God of beautyand sono f Maha Vishnu). She will
possesms any ornamentsa nd be intelligent. Shewill be modest
and will not haveany desiref or other men (than her spouse,i .e.
the native in que3tion)." This is how sageParasarad escribes
the wife of the nativei n questioni n verses2 7-29 ibid. Though
no direct reason has been attributed for the chastity of the
spousew, e cannoti gnoret he dispositionof the 7th lord, parti-
cularly with debilitatedM oon in the 7th. The ?th lord is in the

' 4th giving the native a spousewho would be extremelyd evout
proving an asset to the husband. As such the view of our
presents lokai n regardt o the spousei s at the outset defective.
Thus the wife cannotb e out of the control of the native. The
Chaukambhae dition alsoc learlys tatest hat the native'sw ife will
not be chaste, see qrql{aqlilfrilr and hencet he versionof our
slokai s also rightly interpreted.

{titi qsqt qra qrfi qrigsnftm:r 
gtitr erlftr{q ttw wierrrftrqr:i eetl

77.lt the 7th lord is in the5th, nativewill be honourable,
cndowedw ith all (i.e. sevenp rincipal)v irtues, always delighted
and endowedw ith all kinds of wealth.

Notes : I have observed two salient featuresi n the 7th
tord's gcttingi nto the 5th house. These are : (l) Delay and
disappointmentisn  marriedl ife. The conjugall ife seldomp roves
happy. (2) Severea flliction to progenic indications' Either
there will be unhappinesso n account of children or losso f
children.

The effects mentioned by the sage, viz' virtues, wealth,
honour and (general) happinessw itl also come to pasS. The
happinessa bout marriagea nd progenyw ill visibly be absent.



Chapter2 4 215

This will furtherg rver ise to the native'sa ssociatiown ith
greatpeople. He will be endowedw ith boosteds pirits.

{ri{i Rgur*i qqt as r{nfiTfl |
R"qT qilscr il it ?{d Tldt gdfifiir: llecll

78. If the 7th lord is in the 6th, the native will begeta 
sickly wife, be inimical to her, given to anger and devoid of
happiness.

Notes : The ?th lord in the 6th will reducet he general
happinesso f the native apart from severelyi nflicting his conjugal
bliss. His own healthw ill be poor while his wife will be weak
in constitution. Shewill equallyhaveadverseh ealth conditions
The native will coaleascew ith harlots.

{rifr wtt qr* qtil rr<gwFcar: 
u"tt fqqwdrql 'tq t{Fi qrdfurnl nst.tl

79. lt the ?th lord is in the ?th, the nativew ilt be endowcd
with happinesst hrough wife, be couriageouss, kilful and intelti-
gent but only affiicted by windy diseases.

Notes : By using the word "ii'qti" in the text meaning
"only", the sageh ints that the only possible defect in' the ?th
lord's placementi n the 7th itself will be. troubles from windy
disease(sl ike rheumatism,artheritis elc.).

One undesirable quality will, however, be found in the
native, contrary to no adverse indication in the text, and tbat
is his addiction tg other females. This is an exceptiont o Venus
occupyingt he 7th housei dentiel with Taurus or Libra.

{ti{i qigrrqrd qrd} {rrgd{iira: I
qntsfq <lrrgmrse3r: dlarft t qqfl ucotl

80. If the 7th lord is in the 8th, the native wilt be dcprived
of marital happiness. His wife will be troubled by diseases,b c
devoidof good dispositionand will not obeyt he native.

Notes : As the 7th lord goest o the 8th house,t he native's
spouse will be liable to incur affiictions to her longevity.
However, marriage may bring some pecuniary gains for the
native.



' 
216 Brihat PorssaraHora Sastra

eTit qdqrq?i rrqrt'tfq: (eFrrt: l
qrmaHq?tr snil} qEr(lq.[r} ;tT:l tc{tl

81. If the 7th lord is in the 9th, the nativew ill haveunion
with many women,be welFdisposedto his own wife and will
havem any undertakings(o r assignments).

trit n{qrqrt FrrcrrqFn q{Il3il |
tqri udra] ilal utg?rfEitil: ile Qtl

82. If the 7th lord is in the l0th, the nativew ill begeta
disobedienwt ife, will be religious and endowed with wealth,
tons etc.

rTii qrlTrilq€i ni<ciqqrrrq: I
geftqcm{ q qt: tr;q$rcr}niq tre1 rr

83. If the th lord is in the I lth, the nativew ill gainw ealtl
through bis wife, be endpwedw ith lessh appinessf rom sonse tc.
and will havedaughters.

Notes : If the ?th lord is in the llth house,t here is a
possibilityo f the nativel osingh is childrcn to his grief. He will
obtain (more)d aughters. His own sonswill be hostile to him
rnd will causeh im no happiness. Living son alsos eemst o be
very rcmote a ProbabilitY.

. rtirf qqt ilal qfu: uqqlsfqq r r
qrqtsRq crftils€ qrrEit{l at niq ncvtl

84. If the 7th lord is in tthe l2th, the nativew ill incur
p€nury,b e a miserand his livelihoodw ill be relatedt o clothos.
His wife will be a spendthrift.

qqffi nq1 qn?a11et<lfqsftrdr: 
lfiai Trgunni q f f i rqqlilr ilc{tl

85. EFFECTS OF THE 8TH LORD IN YARIOUS
HOUSES (upro sloka 96) : lf the 8th lord is in the ascendant,
the native will be devoid of physicalf elicity and will suffer from
wounds. He will be hostile to godsa nd brahmins( or religious
pcoplc).



Chapter24 2t7
qerii qi o6arqta: rqTqer 
q{ ilq qiq wr{ f,cef qd a qrq* trcqrr

86. If the 8th lord is in the 2nd, the nativew ill be devoid
of bodily vigour, will enjoya  little wealth and will not regain
lost wealth.

Trili q{t qR srqctd r qrrt I
{til€il qtlQlq{q qTq* qqqftrd: trc\erl

87. If the 8th lord is in the 3rd, the nativew ill be devoid
offraternal happinessh, e indolent and devoid of servantsa nd
strength.

<?*i gqqrqrt nEEta) nitiqq: r
q{egdf,* fraalql n dqrq:r rcqrl

88. If the 8th lord rs in the 4th, the child will be deprived
of its mother. He will be devoid of a house, lands and
happinesas nd will doubtlesslyb etrayh is friends.

Notes : Maharshi Parasarau sest he word "frR[" meaning
child. Hencei t is apparentt hat the nativewill lose his mother
in the very childhood if the 8th lord is in the4th house.

qriri qiqrTri fls{fa: sqTqt I
€erqnl qicqt* {lutXra E;nFqet:r cetl

89. If the 8th lord is in the 5th, the native will be dull-
rsltted, 'will have limited numberof of children, be longlived
i6nd wealthy.

Notes : One's financial acquisitions, though abundant,
'will'not be steadya nd be subjectedto  fluctuations. Though his
intentionsa nd actionsw ill be bonaf ide, theywill go unrecogni-
'zod. He will not be steadyi n disposition and will off and on
ehange his line of thinking. He will not enjoy filial bliss.
fhese are additional hints for the Sth.lord'ss tationingin  the Sth
housea t birth.

rFd{i Rgmatt nTtil qicqa: r
<lqwnttqrq ffin micoq Ee{ nc.otl



218 Brihat Parasara Hora Sasta

90. If the 8th lord is in the 6th, the native will win over
his enemiesb, e affiictedby diseaseasn d during childhoodwill
incur dangert hrough snakesa nd water.

- Notes : The position of the 8th lord in the 6th housei s a
sureshoto f succesosv er enemiesa nd in litigations. The native
will be reducedt o dangert hroughsnakess, corpionse to. during
childhood. Afterwards he will be free from such calamities.
However, this positioni s not very favourablef or one'shealth.
This alsoi ndicatesa  long span of life.

$i{i irr<qrsd ircrt qTqtad nlq t
arFrR r riqqrftta|wl qrq!il EErr neltl

91. If the 8th lord is in the ?th, the native will havet wo
wives. If the 8th lord is conjunct a maleflc in the 7th there
will surelyb e downfull in his busines(sq r livelihood).

Notes : The 7th housebeingoccupiedb y the 8th lord is a
forerunnero f difficultiesi n married life. There will be want.of
understandingb etweent he nativea nd his spouse. The constitut-
ion of the spouse will be quite weak and shew ill alwaysb e
subjectedto  uncertaintieso r dangers.

Outwardlyt he nativem ay poset o be God-fearing. But he
will not be sincerely devotedt o the Almighty. He will be an
experti n stealingo thers't hings.

t;dri $tqrqti wm itatget {d: I
h,i* qsqqq:T qrsqklf aal$qFi;{T:u eRtl

92. If the 8th lord is in the 8th the native will bc long'
tived. If the said planet be weak being in the 8th, the longevity
will be medium, while the native will be a thief, be blameworthy
and will blame others well.

Notes : In remainingi n the 8th itself,t he 8th lord should
be quite strongi n Shadbalas, o the native will be long'lived. If
he is bereft of strength, the native will not enjoy full spanof
life.

The 8th house in occupationb y its own lord will givea 
spouse with questionable character. However she will be a
sourceo f financial help to the natirrc by her own earningso r



Chapter2 4 219
properties. The native will inherii ancestrapl ropertiesa s well.
The evil effectsc itedabovew ill not comet o passf or an Aquarius
nativeh aving Mercury in exaltationi n the gth in Virgo. He
shouldb e within the first half of Virgo to stall the saide vils.
h the later portion of Virgo his potencec onsiderablyd ecreases.

qcei{T irq:Tanl u{r}6t rrftao: I
S6eqrqfq[d{*Er rTTa6"r nq{r($,: 

- nqltt
93. If the 8th lord is in the 9th, the nativew ill betrayh is

relig on, be a heterodox,w ill begeta  wicked wife and will steal
others'w ealth.

Notes : The native will suffer frequent misfortunesa nd
downfalls. His prosperityw ill not be unobstructeda nd he will
fidd it difficult to cope up with professionala dversities. IIis
fatherw ill suffera cut in longevity.H is understandinwg ith his
fatherw ill be dtficient. Progenic happinessw ill not come to
him in full measure. His wife will be of "questionableb irth".
Shew ill go to other men and begetp rogeny. The nativeh imself
will be addicted to others' housewives.T hese are additional
efrectso f the 8th lord occupyingth e 9th housei n a nativity. In
the caseo f a Gemini native,S aturno ccupyingt he 9th house( his
Moolatrikona)w ill not produce these malefic effects. But his
benefict endenciesw ill be quite meagre.

{?ri{i n{qrdei ftq*<ufEafqa:r 
fq{3: 6f€ti{q qf€ iq {im nt.ytl

94. If the 8th lord is in the l0th the nativew ill be devoid
ot i.raternabl liss, be a tale-bearer and be bereft of livelihood.
If there is an-aspccti n the process from a benefic, then these
evilsw ill not mature.

Notes : There is a school of thought to sayt hat the 8th
lord occupyingt he 9th housew ill cause the deathso f parents
right in lhe native's boyhood. Apparently one will not enjoy
parentalh appinesfso r a long duration.

This placemenot f the 8th lord will produce all kinds of
miseriesin  livelihood,f ortunes,f ame,p ropertiesa nd the like.

Accordiog to MaharshiP arasara,if  the 8th lord in the 10th
housei s (well) rdated to a benefic,n o evils will come to pass.



220 Brihat Parasara Hora Sasta

(;rr\{\T  \
ilrq$Ir€R{t TrTIt qqqfqr: r

eretg :<rqt ct rwq atafgaq wFt* ueul
. 95. If the 8th lord alongwith a malefici sin the llth, the

nativewill be devoid of wealtha ndw ill be miserablein  boyhood
but happyl ater on. Shouldt he 8th lord be in conjunctionw ith
a benefica nd be in the llth, the nativew ill be long-lived.

. Notes : The Sth lord in the I lth house,u nlessr elatedt o a
malefic,p articularlyb y conjunctionw, ill not deprivet he native
of financiabl enefits. If he is alone in the llth, he will not
prove that bad in this respect. Moreover,f or Taurus ascendant,
Jupiterin the llth housc is not baneful. And for Scorpio
ascendantM, ercury in the llth will prove a highly favourable
bargaini n the matter of wealth,f ame,k nowledgee tc.

rrtii dTrrqrqr{ Uq,r{ aqq6{ qil |
Eriqr$q qicqra: aqrt s fe{ier: 1e.qtl

96. If the 8th lord is in the l2th, the nativew ill spendo n
evil deedsa nd will incur a short life. More so, if there be addF
tionally a malefici n thc saidh ouse.

qrt{i qrqt qkil silqinl sqqfiEr: r
qrilew RGq{q ;fsilFrq firgfua: tperl

97. EFFECTS OF TEE gTH LORD IN .Y'A,RIOUS
HousES (up to sloka ths) : rt the 9th rorcti s in.the.ascendant,
the nativew ill be fortunate( or.prosperous)w, iil be honouredb y
the king, be virtuous, dharmi4g,i learneda nd ,honoureAU ime
public.

Notes: If the gth rord,isrin: the rising .s!gn;ithe,native.will
hold a very high position which wil bring him weartha nd fame.
He will be free from enemies. A .female ibaviqg .the 
position saiil

w ill prove a worthy housewifea nrl be rid df affiictions
from other planetarys ources.l( Thesee ffects,nilln ot be enjoyed
by a Scorpio native.)

qrrt{i ffrrrrq€Q qfrea} q;rEFFr$Ir: 
qTqe trinr{ firt't ratgarfagwrhErarq: crr



Chapter 24 221

98. If the 9th lord is in the 2nd, the nativew ill be a
scholar,be deart o all, wealthy, sensuousand endowed with
happinessf rom wife, sonsetc..

qrai qrEtTr{€q' qr(t} qRtq(trrF{fr: t
uftrrl gureirerftf sqvifqqqfiqfl: tttQ.n

99. If the 9th lord is in the 3rd, the nativew ill be entlowed
with fraternalblies,b e wealthy,v irtuousa nd charming.

{rQi gfwar$ Temqe{iTf,:r 
t{€qfaqla{q qqwqil c+;qr: nlootl

100. If the 9th lord is in the 4th, the nativew ill enjoy
housesc, onveyanceasn d happinessw, ill havea ll kinds of wealth
and be devotedt o his mother.

TFt{i qiltrrqrt {il+ilq{rqFrf,: r
gwRaw) dH qTrtilnq fieal ;R:1lo{tl

l0l. If the 9th lord is in the 5th the.n ativew ill be endo-
wed with sonsa nd prosperity,d evotedt o elders,b old, charitable
and learned.

qrQqi f<gww.i €qcq{Trrqs} i;lr: t
mgofeqd{t: {r1frT: qtfsa: Tr?t[trt  oRtr

102.I f thc 9th ior.l is in the 6tlr,t he native nril enjoy
meagre prosperity, be devoid of happiness from materaal
relativesa nd be alwayst roubledb y. enemies.

qrQ* qnqrqd qT<qlTrtEt qt{q: I
Wrqq dtfeqtrqTfr qnrt faqqrilq: u I o Qtl

103. O Brahmin, If the 9th lord is in the Zth, the native
will begethappinessa fter marriage,b e virtuous, and famous.

Notes : one will further be abre to achieve successin  ail
his undertakings. His prosperity wilr pick up after marriage.
.The - 

nativew ill be not well disposedt o his father. These e
additional effects due to the 7th house placemento f the 9th
lord.



222 Brihat ParasaraHora Sastra

qrfi{i ${flq€i wrra6ta} a<} q\ r
rleryras<i *q irczl FITFTwT at trlovtr

104.I f thc 9th lord is in the 8th, the native will not be
prosperouas nd will not enjoy happinesfsr om his elderbrothcr.

Notes : Having got the 9th lord relegatedt o the 8th
house,o ne will bedevoid of fortunes.H e will facef ailuresi n all
his undertakings. He will not achievep rofessionaal nd financial
stability. His father will primarily incur a cut in longevity.
The native will be a souroeo f miscries to his eldcrb rothers/
sisters.

A blessingi n disguisew ith this position is a probable
inheritenceo f patrimony by the native.

wQt $narffq€i alqrarurG<a: t
gunl<riwr;a) (€an'q: {q  qd  l l t o t l l

105. If the 9th lord is in the 9th, the nativewill be endo-
wed with abundantf ortunes,v irtues and beauty and will enjoy
much happinessfr om co-born.

Notes : Should the 9th lord be in the 9th itself,o ne will
obtain fraternal bliss. His co-bronw ill amass fortune. The
nativeh imself will own propertics in a largescale. He will
achievee asysuccesisn  eachand every undertaking. His father
will play a significant role in his (i.e. the native's)p rogress.
The native'smother will be free from diseases.The nativewill
be nurturedb y his maternalg randp arents.

qrrli n{ilqrai slal Ttqrsq diRTt: I
q;{t tilqliletsfq gqqq wgfwc: l l lot l l

106.I f the 9th lord is in the 10th,t he nativew ill be a king
or equal to him or be a ministeror an army chief, be virtuous
and deart o all.

Notes : The sages uggesttsh at with the 9th lord goingt o
the l0th the nativew ill be eithera king or a ministeror an army
chief. Apparently,i f the 9th lord is prepotent,o ne will enjoy
royal status. The strength proportionately falling down will
maket he nativeenjoycomparativelyle sserp ositions.



Chapter24 223

sFtri qnTqnrri q?Tilrq] &A fet r
rl{ift Swtrai q gqrqq guq-a6flqll oell

107.I f the 9th lord is in the llth, the native will enjoy
financialg ainsd ay by day,b e devotedt o elders,virtuousa nd
meritoriousi n acts.

Notes : The nativewho hast he 9th lord in the I lth house
will seei ncreasingp haseso f fortunesand prosperity. The 9th
lord indicateso ne'sp rosperitya nd the I lth houseg ains. Hence
the said position is extremelyf avourablef or materialuplift-
ment. This will, however,not applyt o Gemini ascendanht aving
Saturn,t he 9th lord, in the llth house. On the contrary it
will proveh ighly detrimentafl or the prosperityo f the native.

Additional effectsd ue to the 9th lord'g placemenitn  the
llth house (excepting of course Gemini ascending),high
honours,s pirituals uccessm, etaphysicaal chievementsa nd gains
through father.

rnrlnl aqqqr.lgfr qrrqUfffit Tqq I
vmri uqql fii{ fidi}sRfqrffqrE nIocl|

108. If the 9th lord is in the l2th, the nativewill incur
losso f fortunes, will alwaysspend on auspiciousa ctsa nd will
becomep oor on accounto f entertaining uests.

Notes : The 9th lord in the l2th is saidt o causel osso f
wealth on aecount of entertainingguests. In the modern
-contextl avishp artiesw ill take this role. The nativewill land in
financial difficulties on account of throwing parties and the
like.

This po'sitionis  not also auspiciousf or the happinesso f
elder brothers and sisters.

nftl qrai vn) feaq aqrfr q{t nfq: r
c|El tril tql q{qq ql1fafai fEi rrtoerr

IO9. EFFECTS OF THE |OTH LORD IN VARIOUS
HOUSES (upto sloka 120) : If the l0th lord is in the ascendant,
the native will be scholarly, famous, be a poet, will incur
diseasesin boyhood and be happy later on. His wealth will
increased ay by day.



1 '

224 Brihat ParasaraH ora Sasrra

Notes : The l0ttr lord occupying the ascendanti s very
.favourablefo r richesg iving a royal statust o the native. The
followingf igurebelongst o SarabhojMl aharajao f Tanjore.

Rahu
Moon
Sat

Jup
Ven

In the abovec hart, the lord of the l0th is Mercury who is

in tbc ascendanti n own sign. The 2nd lord venus is in the
..rrr1rr^nno f exalted Jupiter. The native amassed a vast
lt;;i; and wealth' He establishedth e Tanjore Saraswati
rr,r"i"r Library which is a treasure-housocf  literatureof ancient

lore.
Theascendanthav ing the l0 th lo rd in i tw i l l con t r ibu te to

the nativ;'; becoming well educateda nd learned. It will also

make one widelY famous'
I f therearenbBa|ar ishtacombinat ionsandif the6thlord

is sufficientlyfa vourable, then the position of the l0t! lord in

the ascendanwt ill not caused iseaseisn  boyhood'

qtiti u?qr.Ri qE{q Uur€ta:t 
a6q6ei .iiil?q{ir fraftqci{ir: ttl I oll



'it optr.i zt u2t
l l0 If the lOth lord is in the 2nd, the nativewill bc

' wealthy, virtuous, honoured by the king, charitablc'and will
enjoy happinessf rom father and others.

Notes : The placement of the lOth lord in the 2nd will
give immeasurablefi nancials uccestsh rough one'so wn profession
or calling, apart from a large scale patrimony. (This will be
more effective for Gemini ascendant having the lOth lord
Jupiter in the 2nd in exaltation). His fame will spread in all
corners,a ccordingt o other classical-exponents.

The horoscopeo f Mr. Morarji Desai,a n erstwhile Primc
Minister of India, as given below, is a perfect example to 'dcpict
professionalf ame etc.

'
Born on 29'2.1896a tl258 hrs (LMT) in Bulsar(Gujrat)' 

RASI
Mars Moon
Merc Ketu
Venus

The lOth lord is in the 2nd house speakingf or the wide
political fam6 he earned through a number of years. He also
occupiedt he covetedp osition of Prime Minilter. He has 'bTchcen
a successfupl erson both financialty and professionally. 
exaltationo f Saturni n a trine, and of Jupiter in the 2nd have
been key factors in the natfve's success.T he I lth housc
receivesit s owo lord's aspectf rom exaltation sign giving gains in
a bctter manner.



226 Brihat Parasara lIora Sastra
'Indiru 

Also refer to the birth chart of Mrs Gandhi,
where Mars ruling the lOth house is in the 2nd house.
Except for a brief period, she continuest o .be the prime
Minister from 1966 onwards. Her fame has spread in all
cornersa nd she is consideredt o be one of the most skilful
administrators.

lfi',rT{t r6n qrd ErE1?qqqiliqar: 
f:rr{i guRrFT?itq: Fq"t sFrqdl q(: unltl

l l l. If the lOth lord is in the 3rd, the nativew ill enjoy
happinessf rom brothers and servantsb, e valorous,'virtuoui
eloquenta nd truthful

. 6fti qqsnci qdf qR!Q* <tr:I 
cn-qfe-gqtu1nl gqq q;Hrtfqu t lqtl

l12. If the lOth lord is in the 4th, the nativewill be happy,
be always interestedi n his mother's welfare, will lord over
conveyancesla, ndsa nd housesb, e virtuousa nd wealthy.

$qm qffiT€i H{fTqrffiftqil: r
(lttil qfitml q?TqrlT grilqfq illlltl

l l3. If the lOth lord is in the 5th, the native will be
endowedw ith all kinds of learning,b c always dolighteda nd be
wealthya nde ndowedw ith sons.

Notes : The lord of the l0th house occupyingt he 5th
housew ill provea  greata ssetf or the nativc bestowinga bundant
wealthw hichwill never.Ieaveh im. He will havea  numbero f
children. There will seldon be filial grief for him. He witl
alwaysmoveamongw ealthyp eople. In the matterof learning
and education,s ky is the limit in his case. He will be very
truthfully disposeda nd command all materialc omfortso f life.
Dr. Rabindranath Tagore's natus is given below which will
deccribeh is radiant intelligence, brilliant learning and unpara-
lleled poetica bilities.Birth data : born May 7,1861 at 3.15AM
IST at 22N35 88E30.
. Note the l0th lord Jupiteri n exaltationin  the 5th obtaining

a potential statusover other planets in the horoscope. Jupiter's



Chopter 24 227

RASI

powerful aspecton his dispositgr, the Moon, lent that tren-
endous mental impetus to the native that he was a pre-
eminentp oet with a matchlessle arning. Mercuryr uling the
4th housei s unaffectedb y the Sun,being 16"a part.

T{{i ftgurart fqEq't<qfirqfqra: 
tgttsft uiqfa: {r{fx: qfftfg-c:n t tvtl

ll4. If the l0th lord is in the 6th, the native will be
bereft of paternalb liss. Although he may be skilful he will be
bereft of wealthand be troubled by enemies.

Notes : fhe 10th lord goingt o the 6th housei s a dirc
blemish for professional and monetary stability. One will
undergof requent changesi n his calling and will. suffer losscr
therein. His financial growth will bs severelyp anlyzed,. Hc
will have a number of enemiescontributing to his decline. He
will incur lasting diseases. An advantage, however,will como
to bim in the form of'extreme intelligence.

qlct{i atwrqd ilfr itn!!erFre:1,
tr{€t't gqqq ilrif q?Eq{rn: (rrTt  t t trr

115.I f the 10th lord is in the 7th, the netivewill bc



228 Brihat Parosara Hora Sastra

endowedw ith happinesst hroughw ifc, be intelligent, virtuous,
eloquent,t ruthful and religious.

nfri q;aqrqd tfsal ctlaq: r
{tefgrca* irnil: qtft;qme{or:n ttqlr

tl6. If tbe l0th lord is in the 8th, rhc native will be
dcvoid of (good)a cts,l ongliveda nd intent on bla/ningo thers.

Notcs : Thc lOth lord's placement in the 8th house
denotesp otenceo f longevity. The l0th .lord is rhe indicator of
one'sK armic credit and his strength or his positioni n the 8th
housew ill contribute to great longevity. That the l0th lord
sbould be considcreda kin to Saturn in the matter of life span is
a fact taught to us by Mabarshi Parasra,v ide sloka 3 in ch. ig.
Tho nrle as per the presentv erse will, however,n ot apply to
Gemini ascendanth oroscopc having Jupiter in the 8th (in fall)
.whicb will in fact adversely rfrect longevity. And a Leo native
will be a significant bcneficiary with Venus in the 8th in
cxslation and will enjoy a considerablyl ong span of life.

rrct\i qrqi qrd rmt rrwgnilewr: 
qtg?Tfti{iT: ltl lstl

l17. If tbe l0th lord is in thegth, one born of royal scion
will becomea  king whereasa n ordinaryn ativewitl be equalt o a
ting. This placementw ill confer wealth and progenich appiness
etc.

6fri qvqqlq6 rtr{qe: rdt r
fq.ldt sFrrRilrr r Snkr* il(: ||ttqtl

It8. If the l0th lord is in the l0th, th€ nativcwiltbe
rkilful in all jobs, be valorous,t ruthful and devotedt o elders.

ildn arqqsrei qkil rrqmFra: r
efq gsrqtlqrR RFr.ilffir q{| gd} n qI  atl

119. If'thc l0th lordisin the llth, the nativew itl be
codowedwitb wealth, happinessa nd sons. He will bc virtuous,
truthful and elwaysd eligbted.



Chapte2r4  2rg

rr*i .qqwn?Q tu qTiltlt ewt: I
nea}s,fr qd fitd agroarfr fqfil{: lllioll

120. If the l0th lord is in the l2th, the nativewill spend
through royal abodes (i e. kings), will have fear from cnemies
and will be worried in spiteo f beings kilful.

Notes : Expendituret hrough royal abodesp ossibty indi-
cates that thc native will lose on taxes, fines etc. to thc
governmenta s the l2th house is involved. Otherwiset,h is can
mean luxurious political expenses. This placementw ill cause
iroubles in financial matters through the Governmcnt.

qt it qrii qTf,:qfrqnlqftlTl qd r
mlfta: rfcqFR"l FiIr Fmr<qfktr lltllll

I2I. EFFECTSO F THE IITH LORD IN TlANOUS
HOUSES (upto sloka 132) z If the I lth lord ir in the ascendant'
the native will be genuine in disposition,b e rich, happy, evcn-
sighted,be a poet, be eloquenti n speechand bc alweyscndowed
with gains.

Notes : Whrin the llth lord is in the ascendent,t he nstive
witl alwaysb efriepdt he virtuousa nd reject evil associations. Hc
will be extremelyp rosperousa fter marriage.

' trrili qffirqd qrl: sriqqTfiqt: t
T{' fbg* itTitTa rfq6{q qd ffi lltllll

122, lf the llth lord is in the 2nd, the native will bc cndo-
wed with all kinds of wealth and all kinds of accomplishments,
bc charitable,r eligious and alwaysh appy.

FrTfnt €€i $[tt: $TFt:
q?il qq{c}la: Ilil]Ntd rqeq tltllll

123.I f the llth lord is in the 3rd,"thenative willbe
skilful in all joba, wealthy, endowedw ith fraternal bliss and may
sometimesin cur gout Pains.

\ \
trrit q<rqr€Ri ilrq) qqgqT{ qt( |
dtriqramrl w* Ktfqq<qrfiqil: lllRYll

It4. If the llth lord is in the 4th, the native will gain



na Brihot ParasaraH ora Sastta

from matenralr elatives,w ill undertake visitst o shrinesa ndw ill
posse$h appinesso f houseand lands.

qtti qirfldei qqGt qfea: !!il: I
fru+frsfq qs?itar:r qd q{ra: qdt u t R{rl

125. If tho llth lord is in the sth, the native's children
wil! be happy, educateda nd virtuous. He will be himself
rcligious and haPPY.

iltiri trrqrer,t qr* tqqqGqa: r
qqfa: llrit q {qfq qRdtfscl:t tRq,tl

126.I f the llth lord isin rhe 6th. the native will be
affiictcd by diseasesb, e cruel, living in foreign places and
troubled bY enemies.

Notes: The placementotfh e l l th lordinthe6thhouse
will augment the chancesof 'acquisition' of diseases.T he
nativcw ill incur defects of hearing orgao. ([n Aquarius,t he
llth lord will particularlya ffiict a Virgo native.with dirc
deafness.)T he nativew ill be so selfisht hat for his own happi-
nessh e will leavc his family membersa nd live awayf rom his
home or hometown. Scrvitude will befit him rather than an
independent profession. He will often undergo financial
fwersals.

qdi .rtqr.Ri qrql in<5q r{r I
lnr(rrr Tfr htit srql rrtqtenqtlail tR\erl

lf,l. If the llth lord is in the 7th, the native will alwaye
gain through his wife's relatives, be liberal, virtuous, sensuous
and will remain at the commandof his spouse.

Notes : Should the 7th housebe occupied by the llth
lord, the native will alwaysl ook upto and receivehelp from his
wifc'c rehtives. He will be quite aflluent as well. He will lack
in wisdom. Judgement will lack in him in thi matter of
cxpensesa nd he cannot make out where to spendand where not

A strong urge to seek union with others' females will
alweyr be prevaleat in him but none will bother for him. Bven
lis own spousew ill bossover him.



Chapter 24 23r

Elii{i rFHqIir(E qfi: nriE cnrt r
aeqrt{q q}E{tti qqd qrsi ftrq:ttlRqtt

128.I f the llth ford is'in the 8th, the nativew ill incur
reversalsin  his undertakingsa nd will live long while his wife
will predeceasbeim .

Notes : The I lth lord in the 8th house increasest he
native'sl ongevity. The geniture given earlier of Sri Morarji
Desaih avingM ars in the 8th beingt he llth lord bea.ras n ample
testimony to this effect. However, this rule should not be
applicdt o Leo ascendanht avingM ercury, the I lth lord, in the
8th housei n debilitation

Rlri{r rrlrqqlqtai qIutETIl qtqt <t: t
qEl: qtqEra q (tqHE* ailfuq: ll I RQtt

12g.l f the llth lord is in the 9th the nativew ill be
fortunate,s kilful, truthful' honouredb y the king and be affiuent'

qr${i qqrr*et qqffa} Wrrfaqfr,' 
f(qu{<a} u'tqq qtq{r{t fq*f?rq: lllQoll

130. If the llth lord is in the l0th, the native will be
honouredb y-the king, be vlrtuous, attached to his religion'
intelligent,t rulitful and will.subdueh is senses'

Note3 : with the 1lth lord occupyingt he l0th house' one

witl be primarily intent on public welfare and redemption' He
*iii A"fi," deepi nto the coreo f his religiona ndb ring out myriad

truths to educatet he public' He will create an epocho f his
own which will go into the pageso f histo,ry' The sacredh oros-

Fnakti VedantaS wamiji is a fitting examplea s given

t"roiopr. n",i StHi ewas born on septemberI st, lu96 AD, at 1530hrs
at Calcutta.

I n t h i s c h a r t , t h e l l t h l o r d V e n u s i s i n t h e l o t h i n d e b i l i .
tation and in the company of the l0th lord Mercury in

exaltation. The Neechabhangoac curringt o Venuse nhancedh is

meritsa nd took him to matchlessh eights' Swamiji had many

other brilliant featuresin  his horoscope,I 'iz' Saturni n peak in

the llth house, the 3 important planets-the Sun' Ketu and

i"piirt - all effectivelyjo ining in the 9th house( andb eingi n one

uoi ,u^. Navamsa)u nd .o on and so forth' Hc foundedH are



232 Brihat Parasaral {ora Sasfra

Moon
Mars

I

Sun
Jup

Ketu

Lagna Merc
Venus

Irj:1r:,il::":t spreadingth e gcled nameo f Lord 
to.theW est- rishna

H 
K

e broughot ut in printh isc omment"ri.
ita o, G n 

erc. in uncountable VrOai
volumcs.A bove alt, ho 

word on ir; 
thel ips of ;;;

millions.
It is my experiencteh at a pranewt ith cancetedd eb'itation

would give suchs plendidr esultsk eepingo therp lAnefs
 make b and d;;;

the world consciouosf  sucha  n-ative.
prcrequisite i tls 

a of ;;;;;
th at the ascendanrot rds hourdp rimariiy 

cnough. t 
In ;.*

the casco f swamiji, the sour standsw ell-fonifiei
and robedw ith identityw ith the praise-worth
prepotent Ly rd. r"rurtiue

9 
o

th house conraininga scendanrtt a 
Suna nd Ketu. Jiu tiu

"roog 
The readerc an arwaysn ote that if tbe 

disposed ilth rord 
in the is 

t0th weil
house,t he native concernedw lll 

his life dedicate
for othersa nd be devoido f desiresto  meeting

cnds' p orsonal
That is the ---

moral we rearnf rom the-swa.i.iis Liir. 
aTrii ***t1* erq: rig n{q 
qfti'i r

ir qdak qiit q iif ei,rrlnl
l3l. If the llth.lord is in the llth, the native

all w ill gain 
his undcrtakings in

w hile his rearninga nd happiness wiil 
the be 

increase on
d ay by day.



Chapter 24 23,/
tTrtqt Eq{ETEqnt tqriq :eq: ftn | \
rfrtfit qlsfnt **=eri*,irrcF,t:r llRtl

132. If the I lth lord is in the l2th, the nativew ill always
elqe_ndo n good dieds, be s-ensuousw,i ll have rnuny *iu"s 
will befriendb 

and
arbarians( or foreigneisi n general).

. Eqt{i qr;i qrfr cqq{frq}q i} qia r
. !rie: sq{rit s qqfqqrfrqfqil,r rtigtl

133.E FFECTSO F THE I2TH LORD IN YARIOUS
IraasES (uptos roka1 44):  If rhe r2rh rord is in the 
then ativew ifl be a spendthriftb, e weak in consti"tru.trioooo"i
s f e f 

*, iu f r p iii
rom hregmaticd isorders,a nd be devoido r weatl 

lcarning. aiJ

Notes:  phregmatidci sorderrse tateto  breathing.troubres,
lung disorderst,u berculosiest c. With the l2th lori g";;;
ther isings ign,t hen ativew ill always ufferf rom oo. aii.uri 
theo ther. oi

He will everb e in the grip of 
witt fea-r acquire of 

m 
"iir-

anv dilel'avtiihii. 
vices. His H;

uri'a"it"rings 
success.

.qtd qiqrqrt qq6,ri E4T: sEi r
ufqs': fsqqr{t i gorelweuFqil:r r?lvH

134. lt the l2th rord is in the 2nd,the nativew il arwavs
spendo n auspiciousd eeds,b e religious, will speak,"..ify 
be endowedw ith virtues and happiness. "lJ

rqid r{il fld sqqtffiqfqil: r
q*E?qq"efl €nffi eqq: nli{rr .

135.I f the l2th lord is in the 3rd, theinative 
devoid will 

oJfraternar be
b rissw, 'l hateo thersa ad wit 

nourishmen(ti .e. pr"."r",rrr-
be quites elfish).

cqid qqrrrqpi qrg:
Qefiqfqils l

qfqqnTqr&il Erfi?a{q fti-ftt nt  tqrr
. 136.I f rhe l2th llord is in rhe 4th
devoid the native 

o f maternahl appinesasn 
will be

d wili day-'by day 
in respecot 

aocrue loss6
f lands,c onveyanceasn d houses.



234 Brilnt ParasaraH ora Sastrd

aqt{i gTTTT€\I$T qalaurfeefqilr: 
rtt il a;lrtrtt€t afqhaq* ;rt: nli\etl

137. If the 12th lord is in the 5th, the nativew ill be bereft
of sonsa nd learning. He will spend as well as visit shrinesin 
order to begeta sbn. t

?qi{i ftgrrrer,i iilril: €EsT;re[(5I'q 
xleftqrft s g:dt a q(slTqniild (: ulQerl

138.I f the l2th lold is in the 6th, the nativewill incur
enmity with'his own men.b e givent o anger,b e sinful, miserable
and will go to qthers' wives.

qirl ErfiFRt Eqql {T(fi: TGTI 
drrr qTqtqd iq qq-fqurfTqfqa:r rllerr

I39. If the l2th lord is in the 7th, the native will incur
oxpenditureo n accounto f his wife, will not enjoy conjugalb liss
and will be berefto f learningand strength.

Era{i letrrrqTQ qra} atrrrfiQa: ftil I
&lars. qEqsFI{q wgotgor{Xfl:t {yotl

140. If the l2th lord is in thc 8th, the native will always
gain, will speakaffably,will injoy a mediums pano f life and be
endowedw ith all good qualities.

Notes : By 'mediuml ife' it is meant to denotea  spano f
life of 60 years.S o to sayt he l2th lord in the 8th will not be in
a position to contribute to higher bracket of longevity.

q*rn qr{qqrqtq 
' gri* rriqr: r

Rffiq q+at eqrqiqrqailR: ul yrtr
l4l. If the l2th lord is in the 9th, tbe nativew ill disho-

nour his elders,b e inimical even to his friends and be always
intent on achievingh is own ends.

aqi* trcqqrqei arql rTq$'qq{lE l
,frq*sft {q il€q Fqiqtq Qqrq,} uly1tl
142.l f the l2th lord is in the l0rh, the nativew ili incur

expendituret hrough royal personsa nd will cnjoy only rnoderate
paternalb liss.



Chapter24 . 235

.qnn qrwrnttt qTi Ufr: nqlq*r
qi.r <Grii red rqrfqtqqil ;R: utvirl

143. If the l2th lord is in tho I lth, the nativewill incur
lossesb, e brought up by othersa nd will sometirnegsa in through
others.
, Notes : One will face obstacles in begettinga child if the
l2th lord occupies tho llth house. He will at last adopt
a child.

sqiri qwnet aaqTtirq{Q  qrq* r
r ntFq<i aer Fltit aqqrl Ttq lt tvvrl

144. It the l2th lord is in the l2th, the nativewill only
face heavy expenditure, will not have physical felicity, bq
iritablea nd spiteful.

tfr t nfqd fqq I qRrrTai q q( 'EFr{| 
qcrcqfqiia q{qi aiqcTf{frEn lv{tt
G<tqitrtTq darq fefqrqhqan qq{ r
fqrlri gumc*iitratn: sqTqilu  lvtrrr
fdk'tqkg qGr*d*: n$a*\ryq r
-t

lokn R{qdqdqi qqt trtverl
qrE ffi da iqfqF{ XiRfa r
sq{ qnf?rdnt il fl+mqi qd qct nlvctl

145-148.M ISCELLANEOUS .' O Brahmin, those are the
efrectso fhouse lords which are to be deduced consideringt heir
strenghs and weaknesses.I n the case of a planet owning two
bhavas, the results are to be deductedb asedon its two lordships
(for the samep lacement). If contrary risults are thus indicated,
the resultsw ill be nullified, while results of varied nature will
come to pass. The planet will yield full, half or a quarter of
the effects accordiry to its strength being full, medium and
negligiblerespectively. Thus I have told you about the effects
due to bhava lords in various bhavas.

,Notes : We get important and key clue to analyset he
efrectso f a bhava lord placed in a certain bhava. Except the
Sun and the Moon, the other 5 planetso wn two bhavaseach. In



236 Brihat ParasaraE ora Sastra

the caseo f the Sun and the Moon, the results cited will come to
pass. (Herea lsoonc ahouldg ived ue considerationt o various
other relative factors. Simply applying the effects without
checkingo thet sourceswill leadt o pitfalls.)

When a planet ownst wo signs,i ts placemenitn  a certain
bhavai s affectedb y its two lordships. For example,t aket he
caseo f Saturni n the 5th house.fora  Piscesn ptive. His position
in tbe 5th as the I lth lord w:lt givec hildren end happiness
through them. And as the l2th lord, he witl deny progenys o
that the native resorts to visiting shrines elc. in a bid to
obtain a progeny. [n such a contrary situation the drfferent
results mentionedf or Saturn'sp osition in the sth should not be
Btraightawadye clared but alternatives ourcesl ike Jupiter( the
significatoro f progery) and the Moon (the owner of the 5th
house)s houldbe looked upto.

Next we are clearly instructed in regard to results of
mutually drfferents pheres. For examplea gain take the same
caseo f Piscesa scendanht avingS aturn in the 5th house. Othor
rcsults mentionedf or the l lth lord beingi n the 5th housee re :
nativeb eingr eligiousa nd happy. As the l2th lord in the 5tb,
the resultmentionedi s that the nativew ill bo devoid of educa-
tion. After sortingo ut the controversya boutp rogenyi,t  should
be declaredthat Saturni n the 5th will deprivet he nativeborn
in Piscesa scendantof learning( as due to l2th lor{sbip) and
witl make the native religiousa nd happy (as the I tth lobd).

qqlsnfiI{tltQtfiqrsilq: ilR{ fl
Chapter 25

Effects Of Non-LuminousP lanets
ttqrfqlqtadent qt{ii rnqsd eilTrI 
sr$rt'rdq$qi q qqTfr T',eErteQIrtrt l

l; Thus f havee xplainedt he effects of the sevenp hnets
viz. the Sun e/c. Now I tell you about the effects oi non-
luminous planets.



Chapter2 5 . 237

qn fmqi"t{r: g(ffiu} faq or:u e: r
qFdFAqqd:A q qrcrlql ?r<:c ari rlrr

2. EFFECTS OF DHT}A,IA IN YARIOUS BHAVAS
(uptos loka 13) : lf Dhuma is in the ascendant,h e native will
be valiant,e ndowedwith beautifule yes.s tupeliedin  disposition,
unkind,wickedand highlys hort-tempcrcd.

Notes : Beforedbclaringr esultsd ue to placementosf  non-
luminousp lanets( i.e. Dhuma etc.), the student will do well
to refer to the sage'sinstructioni n the concludingv erseso f the
presentc hapter.

I haveg iveni u my hotesf or slokas 66-69i n ch.3 details
of ownership,e xaltationand debilitation signs- for the l0 Upag-
rahas and Muhurta planets as culled out from Keeranuru
Nataraja'sJ etakslankaram. These will benefit the reader to
consi'dFeorlro  rdships( or secondarylordships)of thesea lso fer edch'
sign. example, Gulika is 'lord' of Aquarius. Hence in
the caseof a Cancer native, he is the 'qth lord' apart fronr
Saturn'sc andidacyf or 8th lordship. Of coursep rimary impor-
tance be given to Saturn and he should not be underratedi n
that case.

The resultsdue to Dhuma, Gulika etc. will mature in
the Dasap eriodso f their dispositors. For example, if Gulika
is place.din  Virgo, the effectsd ue to Gulika will come to pa"s ln
the major and sub periods of Mercury

In giving effects Gulika is comparcd to,S aturn, Kata to
Rahu,A rdha Praharat o Mercury and Yarnaghantaktao  Jupiter.
The first two a_remalefic in nature while the laJter twci are
benefics. Of all, Gulika js the most powerful in adverse
results while Yamaghantaka( son of Jupiter) is the gighty
benefic.

*rfJ ffit g Srrgl Tlsqrqaaqris:l 
ql Gdtl dfiA q?Eqf,]+ ian:.tt1.tt

3. If Dhuma is in the 2nd, the native will b'e sickly,
wealthy,devoid of a limb, will incur humiliationa t royal level,
be dullwittedand be a eunuch.



238 Brihat Parasara Hors Sastra

{frqri n"trigrwq $afqa: fsdEE:t 
qf vqcw+ei wqal ffiTq ntq rrvrr'

i. If Dhumai s in the 3rd, the nativew ill bei ntelligent,
very bold, delighted,e loquent,a od be endowedw ith men and
wealth.

6q"rg.qfriqq.fr fqrd qEft g:f<c r
qi qgt RrsrFi qi{rrcer{ifqrm: u{tl

5. If Dhuma is in the 4th, the native will be grievedo n
accounto f beingg ivenu p by his Ibmale but will be learnedi n
all sastras,

€ernrrqnrff]i a) qt qrqqiftqil |
gcf,r (.?qfr rr gFwafnEfuarr:q rr

6. If Dhuma is in the 5th, the native will have limited
progeny,b e deviod of wealth, be great,w ill eat anything and be
bereft of friends and Mantras.

qaqrsqlqqqil qr ir Rgqrqnr 
e6tulXa: eerir: (iil *qfffiwe: ll\ell

7. If Dhuma is in the 6th, the native will be strong,w ill
conquerh is enemies-,b e very brilliant, famous and free from
diseases.

fqdq: qnd slit qreR{ rlfra: r
qt wari qril] fcrier: <aierr riq rrcrr

8. If Dhumai s in the 7th, the native will be pcnnilessb,e 
evers ensuouss,k ilful in goiningt o others'femalesa nd be'always
devoid of brilliance.

fqdtur qReqre: alieql €iqn$.e I
srfsq] faqr: rarfr qi t?trr* sfil nQ.tl

9. If Dhuma is in the 8th, the native will be bereft of
courage but be enthusiastic,b e truthful, disagreeableh, ard-
hearteda nd selfish.



Chapter 25 239

{ffilmlqqrqf,l r;it qrdt qqrfiqn:r 
q{rqTi fwt qi u{eq irqEqnnFT:nloll

I0. If Dhuma is in the 9th, the nqiivew ill be endowed
with sonsa nd fortunes,b e rich, honourablo, kind, religiou, ,oJ
well disposedto  his relatives.

eaelxnaigw: wiilft rfaeq tdt r
r*rt qnql f{rTi {* mqqaRqau: Ittl

l l. If Dhuma is in the l0th,'the nativew ifl be endowed
with sons and fortunes, be delighted, intelligent,h appy and
truthful.

eraelFqf(qlqraq) qq{iqq nefiFsilr r
q* ilqqil tq fqdtill dlarlfqE: trr  Rtl

12. It Dhuma is in the llth, the nativew ill be endowed
with wealth,grainsa nd-gold,b e beautiful,w ilt, fuye t<nowieOle
of arts, be modest and be skilfut in singing.

.rfaa: qmsql q a+ aTq{r(gi|l 
nccrtg dsm) 6qq{t^ fqdq: ri6: il t ltl

, l3.  I fDhumais in the l2th, the nativew ill be morallv
fallen,w ill indutgei n sinfula cts,b e interestedin  others' wives,
addictedt o vives,u nkind and crafty.

qfi vrt q qrflri q6r{} g:<fj{tea:I 
TTI qTils* .q<rT d,{} qFEc1;1qpqt vtl

14, EFFECTS OF VYATIPATA IN VARIOUS HOUSES
(uptos loka 25) : If Vyatipata (alsok nown in short p"r")
is in the ascendant,t he native will be troubledb y mis";e ries
crue , b, l e

will indulgei n destructivea cts, be foolishu oa *itt u.'iii:
disposedto  his relatives.

f@sfa|v.rilT qlft uqFQq reniatr 
faq"qvqTsFilfiqq gtarim qFTFnqrt rl {tr

l5' If vvatioata.isin the 2nd, 
crooked the 

b, e native 
b i ii o ui. will 

witt  enjoipG;;";;;, be moralv
be ril""" 

wicked ti"o"t";-r;;;f"i
a nd sinful.



2& Brihat Parasara llora Sastra

fiqqr* wit qrcr qilE* {ErEriFr$rI: 
wcTa ({* qri tqrdtvil q+.'in:u lqrl

' 
16. If Vyatipata is in the 3rd, the nativew ill be firm in

dispositionb, e a warrior, be liberal, very rich, dear to king,
and be beado f an army.

eFuarnf'uqqIq{R: Saelwrraqfqat: 
agtril q{T qtr{qEr tct;cgatwr (: ul\etl

17. If Vyatipatai s in the 4th, .the native will be endowed
with relativere tc. but not sonsand fortunes.

Ek) 6q{rrlrfl: qt* qsqqi qfil r
nqfrwfq*dqil] fmqt fqqeq: lr{url

18. If Vyatipata is in the 5th, the native will bep oor; be
charmiogi n appearance,w ill have imbalatrceso f phlegm,b ile
end wind, be hard-bearteda nd shameless.

{q{fir ggBerq qqtc?Tlri ir iflFr'6: r
n,qrg frWr: nT?ili:n t {r1q* uta rrlerr

19. If Vyati-patais  in the 6th, the native will destroyh is
enemiesb, e physicatly mighty, skilful in use of all kinds of
weaponsa nd in arts, and be peacefuli n disposilion.

uq{rtqt€flr{if: T?'lfqa} g:wdga:r 
qR Fq?i 6rq't finfvq: {<u}6e:u Qotl

20. If Vyatipatai s in the 7rh, the natiuew ill be berefto f
wealth, wife and sons, will subdue to femalesb, c miserable,
sensuous,haAelesasnd friendl).t o others.

fqtilrnl fqsqqq g$rrl faqfqF{s:r 
Tituftt Rqt qrR qffisrqf{cFr.ru: Rlt l

21. If Vyatipatai s in the 8th, the nativew ill haved efor-
mity of eyes,b e ugly, unfortuilate,s pitefuf to Brahminsa nd be
troubled.byd isorderso f blood.



Chapte2r 5 241
trddtllrt1tr6'] kti egfral Tfa'd; I
q{i qradt q rffiqlq fcdT{r ltRRtl

22. lf Vyatipatai s in the 9th, the nativew ill havem any
kinds of businessa nd rnany friends, be very learned, well-
disposedto  bis wife and be eloquent.

(-{tn} q{6qFal a{trig nlfrE:r 
td'tQ qrdii A qgqrfr frq{ur: u1?tl

23. lf Vyatipata is in the l0th, the nativew iil be rich,
religious, peaceful,s kilful in reli$ious acts, very learoeda nd
farsighted.

srraqrr.ill qrfi ftqqr{t !uet: I
wqqql rfreima: wt qrqqe rfr rrqvrr

24, If Vyatipatai s in the I lth, the nativewilt be extremely
opulent, be honourable, truthful, firm in policy, endowed with
many horsesa nd be interestedin  singing.

o,Ht q Egtqfqd arjql q{ca Tqt: I
aqqeqTi rri qrd' fsiql Rq-{;qgu Rtrr

25. If Vyatipata is in the t2th, the nativew ill be given to
anger,a ssociatewd ith many activities,d isabled,i rreligiousa nd
will hatc his own relatives.

f<rq eil'Gr: ltr.d qrqq g{qrcqfq: r
qRql ngi ?iliil qT{d lFTdrq: uRt,tl

26. EFFECTS OF PARIDHI (OR PARIYESHA) M
VARIOUS HOUSES (upto stoka 37) : tf paridhi is in the
ascendantt,h e native will be learned, truthful, peacefulr, ich,
endowedw ith sons,p ure, charitablea nd dear to elders.

trqr) Gq{q *rit gd q{qttqq: | /
qrei qRul artrr: stf{ft rTrrq:u Retl

27. lf Paridhi is in the 2nd, the native will be wealthy,
charming, will enjoy pleasuresb, e happy, very religiousa nd be a
Iord.



242 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

(iTfqq: qqqtql tq€{qriqa: t
SiA qftal T?fr $qf+d$rf;Eil: nQcrl

28. If Paridhi is in the 3rd, the native will be fond of his
wifc, bc very cbarming, pious, wetl disposedt o his men,b e a
scrvantand be respectfulo f his elders

qfrql {qqrdet f{fiqii rqR{qq r
q!$ Rrq €-{d gaii riFd*fqq nRQ.rl

29. lf Paridhi is in the 4th, the native will be wonder-
lFuck, helpful to enemies as well, kind, endowedw ith every-
thing and bc skilful in singing.

ewrq fielq rt;r:irqqrq sri{frct: r
q.!t qftsl qre: ritqri qqfr qwq: niotl

30. If Paridhi is in the 5th, the native will bc afruent,
virtuour, splendorous, affectionatc, religious and dear to hie
wifc.

amNgwrl *Tft qffit (il: I
qRul R$rrrri qU wqt ?R:u l ttl

31. If Paridhii s in the 6th, the native wilt be famousa nd
wealthy, be endowedw ith sons and pleasures, be helpful to all
and will conquerhis enemies.

€lrf,nTer: gqttfr q?irril: gfrwr: I
qRql qim{Fi Ttfrqt qrfq{rr aflqeu lRtl

32. lf Pari<lhi s in tbe 7th, the native will have limited
numbcr of children, bc dcvoid of happiness,b e of mediocre
intelligence,v ery hard-hearted,a nd will have a sickly wife.

qrqr6qfrftqt: nrqrt IUTrrql T6*t: I
qfulq Fmqrq qfrql rl;qifwil ullll

33. If Paridhi is in the 8th, the nativew ill be spiritually
dlsposed,p eaceful,s trong-bodied,f irm in decision, religiousa nd
,Entre.



Chapter 25 243
grG<a: gtfr m'* qrr6d cleuafqxr, 
qfqut sT{t qdt Ferarmguaqngn:lv tl

34. If Paridbi is in the 9th, the nativew ilt be endowed
with sons, be happy, brilliant, very a{fluent, be devoid .of
excessivpea ssion,b e honourablea nd b: happyw ith evena n ioia.

rncrfrrilTaqr dft E6s,rql Urri{rt: r
qRul €{r} xrQ winrreniqRq:n l$l

35. If Paridhi is in the l0th, the nativew ill be versedi n
arts, will enjoy pleasures,b e strong-bodieda, nd be learned in
all sastras.

rftrftrt'l gqqiriq cR rr{ wqqfu: I
iilrri qfreft qrd qqlfiqGqqqir rlqrr

36.If Paridhi is in the I lth, the nativewill enjoy pleasures
through women,b e virtuous,i ntelligent, deart o his peoplea nd
will sufferd isorderso f digestivefi re.

qqr{ qnur qrdi dqqF( rrFrtt: €iil |
g:q$Trrt Scrtlgqq g\Fr-<n<rwr:u letl

. 37. If Paridhii s in the 12th, the nativew ill alwaysb e a
spendthrift,b e miserablef,i rm and will dishonoure lders.

ur€n?qf(wflFl: iF'ail: grr{tt: wdq t
' qiiqlqqkflrrarqfi il-gqi ;R :  l l l q l l

38. EFFECTS OF CHA?A ( LNDRA DHANUS OR
KODANDA) IN VARIOUS HOLTSES( upto. sloko 49) : lf
Chapai s in the ascendant,t he native will be endowed with
wealth,g rainsa nd gold, be grateful,a greeablea nd devoid of all
affiictions.

fsdm: $qF${taqf}q{fa} fquznsGqar : 
?rqd qrqdl q 6qqq et*iltqr: uletl

39. If Chapai s in the 2nd, the nativew ill speakaffably,be
very rich, modest,l earned,c harminga nd religious.



244 Brihat parasara Hora Sastra

Uqoil5ftrrqrkmqtriqfra: ftrr I
rqQ rgfq rril &r.gl {ffilqa: uyotl

40. If Cbapai s in the 3rd, the nativew ill be a miser, be
versedi n many arts, will indulgei n thieving,b e devoido f some
limb and be unfriendly.

qq qlqiarqni {rqwerqfqr; 1
lttt* lSriFA g atrtril ilg qrqt rrvtrr

41. If Chapa is in the 4th, the native will be happy,
endowedwith quadiupeds,w ealth, grains etc , be Uonoured by
the king and be devoid of sickness.

tfqqn {tdqnT q tqqrf,: fsdqa: r
qlt q=qqi an* file: Trtir{g nyltl

' 42, If Chapai s in the 5th, the native will be splendorous,
far-sighted,p iout, affablea nd wilt acquire prosperity in alt his
undertakings

nlrilrslaqdrq qfr t'tfrfq: nfq: r
q66rqrflrt qR efufqfrrnq ||vltl

43. If Chapai s in the 6th, the narive will destroy his
cnemiesb, e happy,a ffectionatep, ure and will .

achieve plentiful- 
nessi n all his undertakings.

trr* UorqTFi:n nafcaTfqt: fqq: r
qrt sqrffirlr€i qqf,fr il dvrq:n vvrr

. U. lt Chapai s in the 7th, rhe native will be wealthy,
endowed with all yirtues, learnedi n sastras,r eligious, an'd
agreeable.

qtr*ta: 
T(: rrqrtqttqq. I

ertaapqtili qrt ilqi fqaqtm: uy111
45. If chapai s in the gth,t he native wit bei ntereste

h sj b , idr n 
ot e ' o s b e cruel,i nteresteidn  other'sw ivesa ndu eo ereciive
limbcd.



Chapter 25 n5
tq€l reaulq Fr<fr frqqrfss: r
u{rQ qTqt qfi qrdE} dt,fana: uvt,rl

46. If Chapai s in the 9th, the nativewill perform,p enance,
will take to religious observationsb,e  highly'learned, and be
famousa mongm en.

qBUeu*rqfr rilqQcqrf€qn q\ r
6{t <nig* sfrq* qffiara: uvett

4T. l fChapaisin the l0th, the nat ivewi l lbe endowed
with many sons,abundantw ealth,c ows, buffaloese tc. and will
be famousa mong men.

nrtTi qrqda Er alq1Jq6] q*aT't
frrlTrl am'fqrfiq+art'lqrrqrrdqirI t yc  || 

48. If Chapa is in the llth, thenative will be gainful,
free from diseasesv,e ry fiery in disposition,affectionateto  his
wife and will have knowlcdge of mantras and weapons( or
missiles).

calsfacr{t Btfefficql qqiftiil I -
qlt etet'tigrd qpril fqtiq: wil uvell

49. If Chapai s in the l2th thenativew ill be wicked,v ery
lionourable, evil in disposition, shamelessw, ill go to other's
femalesa nd be everp oor.

gi{riT: e{faaq gdt erslf<g"r: fqq: r
ril f{rfqf{ Trsqrr:$itrqdiriq\ tr{"rr

50. EFFECTS OF DHWAJA (i e. SIKHI ORU?AKETU)
IN VARIOUS HOUSES (upto sloka 6t) : tf Dhwajai s in the
ascendantt,h e nativewill be skilful in all brancheso f learning,
be happy, e{ficienti n speech,a greeablea nd be very affectionate.

.rrr.tr fqdqE: sriil ffrcqrTq* rqi I
sreqEqq fiealqr;if f$f|fr {r{rrGse:u {ttl

51. If Dhwaja is in the 2nd,'th€ nativewill be a good and
affablespcakerb, e splendorousw, ill write poetry, be scholarly,
honourablem, odesta nd cndorvedwith conveyanccs.



246 Brihat Parasara Hora Sustrd

qE{: strrat q F{rrS qaqFrd:r 
eqqrQ g fhfaft frT*rit nEilq*u {Rtl

52. If Dhwaja is in the 3rd, the nativew ill be miserly,
cruel in acts,t hin-bodied,p oor and wil! incur severed iseases.

Gqqq UqTrct;a:e iFtc6lsfc nfafw: | -
qSRiFig  ftrfcft qil qirft qtaqqffi u{irl

53. If Dhwaja is in the 4th, the nativewill be charming,
very virtuous, gentle, interestedi n Vedasa nd bc alwayshappy.

qtfr *rit rf'ilfstir qeilRqrdi eri I
gfttrn rferq qrdt $qftaqlrfiert: 11{ytl

54. If Dhwajai s in the 5th, the native will be happy, will
enjoyp leasuresb,e  versedin arts,skilledi n expedientsin, telligent,
cloquent and will resPecte lders.

rTldttslH4t6(: ItilQI q6.rr?u?rI: 
a

, ftgrqlf uq* sI€ 6 smrl fqqqq: iltttl
55. If Dhwajai s in the 6th, the nativewill be ominousl br

maternalr ctativesw, ill win over his enemies,b e er.dowedw ith
many relativesv, aliant,s plendorouas nd skilful.

qtrdcrtqfuce: rrqt *qqqFqa: t
cqi g €qrqturl i{trTq g'ae'lEeu:{ qrl

56. If Dhwajo is in the 7th, the native will be interestedi n
gambling,b e sensuous, will enjoy pleasurcs and will befriend
prostitutes.

dlqsdr-E: qrql faitcql fa;ar: Rir I
qigrqfi Dqfr lre qil(qq1qqT6n': {etl

57. lf Dhwaja is in the.8 th, the native will be intercstedi n
basea cts, be sinful, shameless,w ill blame otherg'w ill lack in
marital happinessa nd will take others' side.



Clnpter 25 u7
fffit l11t*ltittl aiqqil 13trI 
q{i f{rfqfr nR u{nft tlfqE: utqtl

58. If Dhwaja is in the 9th, the native will wear (religioue)
badgesb, e delighted,h elpfullyd isposedt o all and be skilled in
religiousd eeds.

{ea}rnrawr: ntfHtii il ?tcfiq:I 
rnar fefr: wtTlttt: 6,tr fnfqfr frq ! trtett

59. O Brahmin,i f Dhwajai s in the l0th, the nativewill be
endowedw ith happinessa nd fortunes, be fond of femalerr'bc
charitablea nd will befriendB rahmins.

faircrq: g{df q trri frrfqh 1fqil: I
u;rrirq: {f,rl: qr: ({fiTqlft dfir<: llQoll

60. If Dhwaja is in the llth, the native will ever acquire
gains,b e very religious,h onourable,. affiuent, fortunate, valiant
and skilled in sacrificialr ites.

qqn{qa: n<: xarqFlqor} 3lT: I
tnqlqqir'f ltr: f{rfqfr qqi sfr ttqt tr

61. If Dhwaja is in the l2th, the nativew ill bc interested
in sinful acts, be valiant, untrustworthy, unkind, interested in
others' femalesa nd be short'tempered.

'<JqIf: rdii srqt Erqriqrfqffi: 116I: 
ag?i gfe* vn: <tFlqlqlsfiq:fqil: tlqRll

62. EFFECTS OF GULIKA IN YARIOUS HOASES
(upto slokaT3) : lf Gulika is in the ascendant,t he nutive will
ie-africtcd by diseasesb, e lustful, sinful, crafty, wicked and very
miserable. 'non-luminous 

Notes : Out of all the phnets, Gulika
deservesa  specialc onsideration in natal horoscopy as well as
horary astrology. This is also a very important factor in birth
rectification, and such other important calculations'

lf Gulika is in the ascendant,h e native will incur sever€
defectsof e1es. He will take to bad acts like thieving' He



248 Brihat parasara Hora Sastrd

yil!. disregard religion, be deprived of progeny and be
dullheaded.H is longevityw ill incur a severec ur.

As already stated, in the case of each Upagraha and
Muhurta Vela, the dispositors hould invariablyb e considered
beforc coming to a conclusion.

frFrfi 3:fqa: Qlale nr{t ? rd?rT:I 
qiTn gftr* am) fr:rql qqfil mqErn:l rltl

63. If Gulika is in the 2nct,t he nativew iil be unsightly
appearance, n 

m 
i

iserable,m ean, given to vices, shameress 
penniless. and

. Notes : ShouldG ulika be in the 2nd house,
ill t w he 

further native
be unfortunate. His learningw ill be 

and obstructed 
on. He will off

have speechd cfects,f ,e harshi " 
live ,;;;;;;ii

awayfrom his people, 
'untruthful, will not havef amity n"ppii"*, 

will J"
involve in a scan.al, be unfit ,; 

others ,;;;;;;;;
a nd *ill in the Dasap eriodsu i tt. zoo lord 

equal to face 
death. troubles

fiigf qrtq: luligm: eaqqfqq:r 
Ftil gfq* !ilil} qli* ncgfwa: lttytl

64. If Gulikg is in the 3rd, thc native will bec harming
&ppearance in 

w, ill head a village, be fond of virtuousm en,a nd 
honoured be

b y the king.
Notes : With Gulika in the 3rd house,one will

destruction face
of co-born. Though fairly rich, he will

distresscd. feel

*trdit t gqqfuqw: rnr qqfd qrqF( |
gfq+ qqqrltl lrcfrarftrl qlinq  r rqrrr.

65. If Gulika is in rhe 4rh, the native will be 
devoid sickly,

of happiness,s inful and affiicted due to wiqay anj
bilious excesses.

Notes : The native will not befriend anybody but 
inimical be

t o othersi ncrusiveo f his reratives. He will be devoid
of convcyanceso r will face risks through conveyances. He will



ahapter2 5 24g
not havea  good houset o live in. His last days will be
miserablaen ddeathw ill bep ainfula ftera  longc onfinement.

Regfafraa'l$qqfdt aul qiet: t
gtqt {ilsilrrri Ft'lf,irdr}R ar} viq rrqqrr

66. If Gulika is in the 5rh, the nativew ill not be praise-
worthy, be poor, short-lived, spiteful,m ean, be a eunuch, be
subduedb y his wife and be a heterodox.

Notes : The native's virility or. progenic ability wiil be
significantlya ffected by Gutika's occupyingt he house of
progeny. He will not be in a position to obtaini ssuesu nless
Jupitera nd the 5th lord are favourabri. Gulika in this house
will makeo ne devoid of God-fearing tendencya nd be at the
disposal of his wife. His personard ispositionw il not be
agreeabte.

daqn: {g6arg.} ftgrrni qTrriqtr 
{*ca: rtrrtr: rflqt alemq:{.! a} Qa:n q\etl

67. If Gulika is in the 6th, the native will be devo,ido f
enemiesb, e strong-bodieds, plenorousl,i ked by his .rrit u-
siastic,v ery friendly and helpful in disposition. "if", 

Notes : When Gulikai s in the 6th houset,h c nativew ill
be intcrcstcdin  conrroting ev' spirits and makea  rivelihood
from sucha chievemcnts.H e wiil obtain children. H" ;ili;;
very courageous' There wi[ be freedomf rom diseasesif  the
6th hoUsec ontainingG ulika is a benefics ign.

f*fqa: qrTE;strrtF: 
'

{nq;} {arlqa: | 
. *fEril; rt'tainE gfq+ Rcnqftq*lQ et l

6E' If Gurika is in the zth, the native wiil subdue 
gpouse,b 

to his
e sinful, will go to others' females,b e emaciated,

{ev9i-d of friendship and will live. on wife,s (or 
yealth. a fcmale,sj

Notes : Gulika occupying the 7th fiouse,w ill make 
nativet brive the

on a femarc'sw eaitho r through the contributions
of his own spouse. His conjugall ife will not cause him any
hapniness. IIe will possibly huu. mor. than one marriagc.



250 Brihat ParasaraH ora Saslta

His knowledgew ill not be quite much. In relation to public
dealingsh, e will incur misunderstandingasn d enmity.

qur{r{:fca gealewlwlsfkfadq:t 
GEri gfq+' fr:tql qTqt laafca: utQ.rr

69. If Gulika is in the 8th, the native will be troubledb y
hunger,b e miserable,c ruel, very rnuch short-temperedv, ery
unkind, poor and bereftof good qualities.

Notes : The native will find it difficult to get evena 
squarem eal. His facew ill be ugly. His eyeswill be diseased.
His teethwill be yellowish. He will be quite short in stature.
Thesea re additionale ffectsa s due to the 8th housep ositiono f
Golika, son of Saturn.

rgrtn: !f: I
gFdt ufi qr{: lqq<} lQrrgfa: neotl

70. If Gulika is in the 9th, the native will undergom any
ordeals,b e emaciated,will performe vil acts, be very unkind,
sluggisha nd be a tale-bearer

Notes ; If Gulika is in the 9th houseo ne will be dcvoid
of paternalb lissa nd good fortunes His father will passa way
io the native'schildhoodi tself. None of the native'su ndcrtak-
ingsw ill bearf ruits.

grrFqil: qdt qlrat tqmqfreesq: I
E{rt gflq* qrtr q}quqtfqn' qd uetrl

71. lf Gulika is in the l0th, the native will beendowed
with sons,be happy,will enjoym any things,be fond of worshi-
pping godsa nd fire and will practisem editationa nd religion.
' Notes : The placemento f Gulika in the l0th house, will
prove favourablefo r Yoga, Meditationa nd such other achieve-
ments. The native,a t one stage,will turn irito a heterodoxa nd
discardhis religiousc ode.

${t*qt qqTsrrer}E ?uri a fqi ra: t
cnirri gfq* urd {targ il{qler: ueRtl



Chapter 25 2SI
' 72.lf Gulika is in the llth, the native willenjoy women

of class,b.e a  leadero f men,b e helpful to his relatives,b e short
in staturea nd be an emperor.

Notes : If Gulika is in the I lth house,t he subjectw ill be
in the companyo f many females. He will be devoidof good
character. He will enjoyp rogenich appiness., w ealth statuse tc.
and be charmingi n aPPearance.

{tsfiqtfa{-d: qn} alaq} 3{rilsau: t
Eqqi gtq* ilil} nlng 5ai falttultt

73. lf Gulika is in the l2th, the nativew ill indulgei n base
deeds,b e sint'ut, defective'limbedu, nfortunate, indolent, and
will join mean PeoPle.

Notes : Gulika's tenancy in the l2th hdusea t birth will
bring innunterablem isfortunesa nd cause losso f wealtho n evil
missions. One vrill, however,e njoy progenichappiness.

qrl swrqa eilft *rit qqfa fl;Gt: I
Hs'krn] ErcIg'TgS rtS 3fe:a 5'{tillevll

14. IiTTTI'TS CT PRANAPADA'S POSITION WITH
'L'IIE 

RE|IEREN{:LT 'O ASCENDANT (upto sloka 85.) : lt
Pranapadais  in the'ascendatttt,h e native will be weak, sickly,
dumb, lunatic, dullwittcd, defective-limbed,m iserable and
emaciated.

Notcs : Pranapadai s a special ascendant. How to calcu-
late this specials ensitivep oint could be found on p. 47 supra'

Pranapadaw ill fall in a certain degreea nd its relation
with referanceto  natal ascendanwt ill portend manya n eventa s
terselys howni n the presentl 2 verses'

T6Fx"d q6ufl q6T?q] qErM: I
wFsffiRqe qlli qqql qrq* ;T(: lle{ll

75. If Prlnirpadai s in the 2nd, the nativew ill be endowed
with abundant grains (rice, wheat etc.), abundant wealth,
abundanta ttendc.ntsa,b undantc hildrena nd be fortunate.



2s2 Brihat ParasaraH ora Saslra
fqd nrierrgrd faeq<lsfeefqrqar: 
qdtai srurqa gaqFirffiilr usqtl

. 76. If Pranapadais  in the 3rd, the nativew ill be injurious,
(or mischievousp),r oud, hard-hcarted,v ery {irty and Uea evoij
of respectf or elders.

g<r€t g gqt 6Ttt: s€arnq ltrqq: I
gfl lt<Ftot: rita: sT,i n e?qilerrtu: een

??. If Pranapadais  in the 4th, the native will be happy,
friendly, attachbdt o femalesa nd elders,s oft and truthful.

{({rIT{ gfm}tcerawRqqGEa: r
TsqqFQ smql miilqsqfq: uectl

78. If Praiapadai s in the 5th, the native will be happy,
will do gooda cts,b e kind, andv erya ffectionate.

qq{qqnralwr} q;qrFqft{q: erFrI: 
q68 $torre trit Rnqlso-qrgiq r uuetl

- 79, If Pranapadias  in the 6th,t he nariver yillb es ubdued
by his relatives and cnemics,b e sharp, will have d--;'f-;-;;"'-
digestiveIi re,b e wicked,s ickly,a fHuenat n{ qhorrliv.O. 

foqfq qdd $tql ctq*ilqrir.r
qci1q€a.i Fru1qe

ftKTuq: $frWq 1ro;1
80. IfPranapadai s in the 7rh, the n4rive

eyed,e ver W ill
l ibidinous, b Sg reen-

f iercei n appeqranpeb,g  nol 
and worth

e r b espect
ill-disposed.

rlqq"fiT&mg{q srutqresse}g fr 
qllca. qrfqig,rit.eqc-{qdqr*t

r,f rtft
- -.81. If 

pranapadaisin .the.8th, the g141iv9l?ill 
by diseasesb,e  troubleda ncl b;4flicted

will in"u. mis.irVe n appggpt
ing, o k f 

relatives, the
servantsa nd sons.

g?qq rl;rttrtT;;r: {fiq: fgqEdr: t.
srri tr{ftqil Tiq: HErsg6ef}q qqq: ttq3tl



Chapter 25. 253

82. If P-rvaenrya padias  in the 9th,'then ativewill be endowed
with sons,b e rich, fortunate, charming, will serveo thers
and be not wicked but be skilful.

dtfoq qfrtnq <al gurig clfqE:r 
Err} n srq€ *qFiiqwnr:n cQtl

83. If Pranapedais  in the r0th, the nativew il be heroic,
intelligent,s kilful, be an experti n carryingo ut royal orders,a nj
will worshipgods.

fM gurq rr* q){}q;RilTfiTf,:I 
ilqrqnfiqi $T!i qkrsl srT€Tiqqn: cytl

84. If Pranapadais  in the I lth, the nativew ill be famous,
virtuous, learned, wealthy, fair_complexioneda nd attached 
motner. to

qlrl gyq t1n$ feiqt Gvffqgr 
ql s$n lrnfi fiorl qt qrqi i<]nq{tl

85. I fPranapadaisin the l2tb, thenat ivewi l lbe 
wicked,defective-limbed mean,

w, ifl hate Brahmins and relatives
will suffer a nd

f rom eyed iseaseosr  be one_eyed.

TFcqqssflfYlYr€r€aa|;FIiri rdtrrtqqrf" 
{$ ! |

aqt qrfr nnr{tni gat{hi qq,iih nqqtl
tlfr ft'fdevrtet 

' rqalfteE{rrq aqi r
Tflrsqffii*" q{ir6qrfr nr"tf<urql cetl

- 86-87.O  Brahmin, these are the effectsfo r Dhooma etc.
1*U-*:li-*pada _ascendant)B. efore O.U".t"g'; ;;";;r:
:*^:[:,j'".:l-11'_Suann. do rr,..p ruo.i,'rfi"il;';j:.,;
conceivedb y their positions, relationi and aspects 
their upurt 

strength fioi
or weakness.

Notes : lVe areadvisedt o look upto the 
while Sun 

declaring nd 
t 

a
he others

effects due to Ofroiru, Gulika 
sayt he etc. 

dispositors So to
o f Dhooma etc. snouio be scrutinized 

know the extento 
to

f effects. For example 
give if Gulika 

bad effects is due 
b, ut his to

dispositori,  ,".i1-"rp."ted,w ell-placed
wet-rerated, o r

t he evirs are minimised. conversety if favourable



254

effcctsa re due to Gulika etc. the weakncsso r advcrsep lace-
mento f the respictivsd ispositowr ill not allow maturityo f such
good effects.

Another hint we takp from theset wo versesis : We should
balancet he results due to Dhooma, Gulika etc. with the
resuttsd ue to the planetsf rom Sunt o Saturn( and of courset he
nodes).F or exampleG, ulikai s in the llth and good effectsa re
due. If a planet posited in the same llth dcnotesc ontrary
results, then the strength of ' the two will lcad to correct
cstimationo f the situation.

qrr qE$6a{f6efiqTdrsqrqil:R q tl

Chapter 26

Evaluation of Planetary Aspects
qrrq1 ! mlaqr {tarief tfilRei ilqr I
Ela * i{rq} ila*d rqq frw{fa ttltt

l. O Glorious, it is said that aspects( cif planets)a nd
strengthsa re to be known in deciding the effects. How many
kinds are these?  Pleasec larify my doubts.

' gfl <t|rrsvrq qfta: X{gliil ir n Bq r
qqr dawrnqleqr ftf, ili 6'qqF4(c illll
lH q Rmloi q qg{d q €cd} l
qrqaqr 5HqulFf, qqEqFfi l[Ff ilqI lllll
g!fi ir qcad €{, nfr-vita-gm: 5d: I
fHqelq f{E{-f"s}qr-qg$*Ttq | |v  | |
tfr €tqrcFt: g{<rar{: gfaqrkilr t
greFer<cnilrilq  Tfoara nfaqa qql uttl

2'5. PLANETARY ASPECTS. ' O Brahmin,I  have ear-
lier stateda spectsb ased on signs. The other kind is between



Chapter2 6 z1s
planetsw hich I detail below. 3rd and l0th, 5rh and 9th, 4th
and 8th and lastly zth-on thcsepracest he aspectsi nci."s"
graduallyin  slabso f quartersi .e l14, 112,3l4thandfu lt. The
effects( due to such aspects)w iil also be proportionate. Ail
planetsa spect the Tth fully. Saturn, Jupiter and Mars have
speciaal spectsre spectivelyo n 3rd and lOth, 5th and 9th, and
4th and 8th. The ancientpreceptorsh avee xprainedth esew hich
are ordinary (arising by mere sign .positions).-B y subtle
mathematicacl alculationst,h esea spectsw ill bavet o be clearly
understooda s under.

$qq fqntEq6 at q$Tf{$q}sfUr6r?rr({ 
feqrq:r tvileqr {qTqr Gwm gq FtaTq iE | | q,||
qgqft+ fqilrqf{| rfiqGE{r{qT q qeT I
+{rFq+? qdEq aq ilfi !faa:,f afifb* rr\err
fkrilEqTliq-dl Ergqi q-o?|ja qr{ga q Tq I
rqfq+ q fan <rfn wqftafargirrcilcrru qtl

68. ASPECTUAL EVALUATIONS .. Deduct the longi-
tude of tbe aspected planet (or house)f rom that of the
aspectingp lanet. Ifthe sum exceedss ix signs( or I80 deg)
deduct the sumagain from l0 signs (br 300 deg). Con,,,ert
the latests um into degreesa nd divide by two. The resultant
producti s Drishti Kona or aspectuala ngle. If the difference
(betweena spectora nd aspectedi)s  in excesso f 5 signs, ignore.
signsa nd multiply the degreese tc. .by 2 which is the aspectual
value. If the differenceis  in excesso f 4 signsd educti t from 5
signs( or 150d eg)a nd the resultantd egreee tc. beeomeD rishti
value.I f the differenceis  in excesso f 3 signsd educti t from 4
sigps( or 120degressa) nd halve the product to be increasedb y
30 to get Drishti value. If the diference is above 2 signs
ignoresignsa nd add t 5 to the degreese tc. to get Drishti value.
If it is in excesso f one sign,i gnore Rasisa nd divide thc degrees
etc. by 2 to get Drishti value.

cwfu* fqqrr fl{r rrFrr arrFirrT$ql  q\ r
. qrq tnflF{* iri nal aGrf{ * feq ! rrerr



256 Brihat parasara Hora Sastara
gni aet urrn t{f,r qlrqr Gvgvr: r
GdfinqTfqmq:f i;*q,i qTFogtF rrTurl:o tl

9.10. SPECIAL CONSIDERATION FOR SATURN,S
ASPECTS. . O Brahmin,i f Saturni s the aspectingplanetf ind
out tbe differenceb etweenh im and the aspectedp lanet; if the
sum is aboveI  sign,m ultiply the degreese tc. (ignoring sign)
by 2 to get Drishti value. If the sum is above nine sinls',s tuhme
degreesto  elapseb e doubredt o get aspectuavl atue. rf thi 
is above 2 signs, the degreese tc. (in excesso f 2 signs) be
halveda nd deductedf rom 60. tfthe sum exceecrgs  signsiaia to
the degreese tc, a figure of 30 to get Drishti value. in other
cases,t he sumsb e processeda s explainede arlier.

fne.ai E qlrnq efta(T ad|firfl |
qtqlqrTffiqigrm Bt, c'i gq|Ff,lflf ltl

II. SPECIAL CONSIDERATION FOR MARS'
ASPECTS. . Deduct the longitude of Mars from that of the
planet aspected( by Mars). If the sum is 3 Rasis&  c or 7
Rasis& c, the degreese tc. (after ignoring Rasis) be reduceO
from 60. If it is abovg2 .Rasis,t he degreese tc. be increasedb y
half of it (i.e. add 50'/,1 and superadd1 5. If the sum.is b
signs,o ne Rupa is the value.

fesqri E aflq?q qT'rd rn-ta-gqi
ffiq idr*rr: at(fl{irirT6ai rtl1tr
gt {affi€fi-i rqa 1fta: nqrqt I
aEfitq ff.rFri ErRTfiFrrs ,Ff liq rr11rr

12, SPECIAL CONSIDERATION FOR JUPITER'S
ASPECTS. . Deduct the longitude of Jupiter from that of the
planeta spectedb y him. If the resultants um is 3 Rasis&  c or
7 Rasis & c, halve the degreese tc. (ignoring Rasis) and
increasei t by 45. If the sum is 4 Rasis&  c or g Rasis & c, the
degrees etc. (ignoring Rasis) be subtracted from 60. This
will be the aspectuavl alue. The sum being in conformitywith
others than theseb e treateda s statede arlier.

Notes : Throughout this chapter and others related to
calculationo f strengthso f planetsa nd houses,t he term ..Virupa'



Chapter 26 2s7
has been used which denotes 'Shashtiamsas'o r 'Kalas'. 60 such
units makeo nq Rupa.

The planet that aspects is Drishti Graba or the aspector.
The planet that is aspected is known as Drisya Graha
or the aspected. The longitude of 'the aspected.'i s to be
deducted from that of the aspector. If the longitudeo f the
aspectedis  lessert han that of the aspector, increaset he longi-
tude of 'the aspected'b y 360 to facilitate deduction,w hich will
yield the aspectualo r Drishti angle.

After finding out the'Drishtia ngles,t he variousq uantities
will have to be processeda s under with the relevant principles :

Rule l. When aspectual angle is between 30 and 60
degrees,r educe30 degrees from the resultant aspectuala ngle
and tlivide by 2 to get aspectuavl alue.

Rule 2. If the aspectudal ngle is above60 but below 90
degreesr,e duce6 0 from the aspectual angle and add 15 to get
aspectualv alue.

Rule 3. In case the aspectual angle is above90 but less
than 120 degreest he aspectualangleb e redirced from I20, then
halveda nd then increacedb y 30, to get aspectualv alue.

Rule 4. If the aspectual angle is between 120a nd 150
degreesr,e ducet le angle of aspect ttom 150t o get aspectual
value,

Rule 5. If the aspectuala ngle is between 150 and 180
degreesr educe I50 from aspectuala ngle and double the
resultants um to get aspectuavl alue.

Rule 6. When the aspectuaal nglei s above 180but below
300d egreesd eductt he aspectuala ngle from 300a nd halvet he
resultanst um,t o get aspectuavl alue.

Needlestso mentiont herei s no aspectuavl aluei f the angle
is between3 00 and 30 degrees.

. For housei n aspect,considert he cusp of the hpuse, akin
to a planetary degree.

In the caseo f aspectsfr om Saturn, Mars and Jupiter,t he
followinga dditionsmay be noteda s a simplef ormula.

A) Mars : When the aspecta nglei s 9G120degreeso r 210-
. 249d egreesa,d d 15V irupast o the valueo btainedf rom

the speculum.



258 grihat parasara Eora Sastra

' B) Jupiter : When theaspect anglc is 120-t50d egreeso r
.240-270 degrees incrcase 

' the speculum valuc by 30
Virupas.

C) Saturn : When the aspect angle is 6G90 degreeso r
270-300d egrebsa nd 45 Virupas to the value obtained
from the speculum.

Without undergoing these ordeals, tbe studentc an eaeily
find out the Drishti valueso n the above lines from the Speculum
of AspectualValuesg iven below :

Spccdum of Aspetual Vdues (Conrputerlzed)

Deg:Mn Vlrup. Deg:Mn Yirupa Deg:l\,In Virupl

30: 0 .00 4l:30 5.75 53 :0  11 .50
30:30 .25 42: 53:30 I t.Z5
3l: 0 ' .50 0 6.00

42230 6.25 54:0  12.00 '
'332l::3 0 .75 43:O . 6.50 54:30 tZ.2S

0 1.00 43:30 6.75 55: 0 12.50
9223O 1.25 44t O 7.00 55:30 12.75
33: 0 1.50 M:30 7.25 56:0  t3.00
33:il0 1.75 45: 0 7.50 56:30 t3.25
34: 0 2.00 45:30 7.75 57:0 t3 .50
34:30 2.25 16: 0 8.00 57:30 13.75
35: 0 2.5A 46:30 8.25 58:0 14.00
35:30 ?.7s 472O  8.50 58:3O 14.25
36: 0 3.00 47:30 8.75 59: 0 14.50. 
36:30 3.25 48: 0. 9.00 ' 

59:30'1 4.7J
77t 0 3.50 48:30 9.25 60:0 15.00
lt:to 3.7s 49: 0 9.50 60:30 15.50
38: 0 4.00 49:30 9.75 6I :  0  t6 .m
38:30 4.25 50: 0 10.00 6l:30 16.i0
39: 0 4.50 50:30 t6.2s 62: 0 17.00
39:30 4.75 5l: 0 10.50 62:30 l7.SO
4ft 0 5.00 5l:30 10.75 63: 0 18.00
40:30 5.25 522O  11.00 63:30 t8.50
4l: 0 5.50 52:30l l.?5 64: 0 19.00



Chapter 26 259

Deh:lltn Virupa Deg:Mn Virnpa Deg:Mn VirrF

64:30 19.50 82:0 37.00 99:30 &.25
65:0  ?0.00' 82:30 37.50 100:0 40.00
65:30 20.50 83: 0 38.00 100:30 39.75
66: 0 21.00 83:30 38.50 l0 l : 0  39 .50
66:30 21.50 84:0  39.00 l0l:30 39.25
67: 0 2200 8l:30 39,50 102:0  39.00
67:30 22.50 85: 0 40.00 102:30' 3388..7550
68: 0 23.00 85:30 40.50 103:0  
68:30 23.50 86:0 41.00 103:30 38.25

' 69: 0 24.m 86:304 t.50 104:0 38.00
69:30 24.50 87: 0 42.00 104:30 37.75
?0: 0 25.00 E7:30 42.50 105:0 37.fi

'?0:30 25.50 88: 0 43.00 105:303 7.25
7l: 0 26.m 88:30 43.50 106:0 37.00
?l:30 26.50 89: 0 44.00 106:30 36.75
12| O 27.00 89:30 M50 107:0  36.50
72230 27.5O 90: 0 45.00 107:30 3625
73: O 28.00 90:30 44.75 108:0 36.00
73:30 28.50 9l: 0 44.50 108:3035.75
74: O 2g:W 9l:30 44.25 109:0 35.50
74:30 29 50 92: 0 44.00 I09;30 35.25
75: 0 30.00 92:30 43.75 t l0: 0 35.00
75:30 30,50 93: 0 43.50. I 10:30 34.75
76:0  31.00 93:30 43.25 ll l :  0 34.50
762303 1.50 94: 0 43.00 I I 1:3O3 4.25
772O 32.00 94:30 42.75 I 12:0 34.00
77:30 32.50 95: 0 42.50 l12:30 33.75
78: 0 33.00 95|30'42.25 l l 3 :0  33 .50
78:30 335 0 96:'0 42.00 I l3:30 33.2'5
79: 0 34.00 96:30 41.75 114 :0  33 .00
793A 3{.50 97:0  41.50 . I L4:30 32.75
80: 0 35.00 97.30 41.2s l l5: 0 32.f i
80:30 35.50 98:0  41.00 ll5:30 tLN
8l: 0 36.00 98:30 40.75 116:0 32.00
8l:30 36.50 99: 0 ,10.50 116:30, 1.15



260 Brilat Parasara Hora Sastra

Deg:lldnV hupr Deg:l\,InV irupa Deg:Mp Virupa

l 17 :0  31 .50 t34:30 15.50 152:0 4.00
I 17:30 31.25 135:0  15.00 152:30 5.00
I 18:0  31.00 135:301 4.50 153:0  6.00
I l8:30 30.75 136:0 14.00 153:30 7.00
I 19:0  30.50 136:301 3.50 154:0  8.00
itg:to 302 5 l3?: 0 13.00 154:30 9.00
120:0  30.00 137:301 2.50 155:0  10.00
120:30 29.50 138:0  12.00 J55:3OI 1.00
l2l: 0 29.q0 I 38:30 I 1.50 '156:0  12.00
l2l:30 2850 1390:   11.00 156:3013.00
l22zO . 28.00 139:301 0.50 157 :0  1400
122|30 27.50 l'CI: 0 10.00 157:3015.00
123:0  n.N 140:30 9.50 158 :0  

1410:   ' 9 .00 16 .00
123:30 26.50 158:301 7.00
l24z 0 26.00 l4l:30 8.50 159:0  18.00

'124:302 5.50 142:0  8.00 159:301 9.00
t25: 0 25.00 142:30 7.50 160:0 20.00
125:302 4fr 143:0  7.00 160:302 1.00
126:0  U.@ 143:30 6 50 16 l : 0  2240
t26:30 23.50 144:0  6.00 16l:30 23.00
tTl| o 23.00 144:30 t.50 te2;0 24.00
Ittzt0 22fi 145:0  5.00 162:30 25.00

'128:0  22'0o 145:30 4.50 163:0 26.00
128:302 1.50 146:0  4.00 163:302 7.W
129:O  2l.m 146:30 3.50 '116644::300  2E.00
129:30 20.50 147:O  3.00 2g.m
130:0  20.00 147:30 2 50 165:0 30.00
13030 19.50 148:0  2 0O 165:3031.00
l3l: 0 19.00 148:30 1.50 166:0 32.00
l3l:30 18.50 149:0  1.00 166:30 33.00

'132:0  18.00 149:30 .50 16?:0  34.m
132:301 7.50 150:0  .00 167:3.0 3 5.00
133:0  l?.00 150:30 1.00 168:0  36.00
1332fi. 16.50 l5l: 0 2.00 168:303 7.W
134:0  16.9, t5t:i0 3.Qo 169:0 38.00



Clapter 26 26t

Deg:Mn Virupa Deg:MnV irupr Deg:Ml Virupl

169:303 9.00 187:0  56.50 204:30 17.75
170:0  40.m 187:3056.25 205:0 47.50
170:304 1.00 188:0  56.00 205:30 47.25
l7l: 0 42.00 188:3055.75 206:0 47.m
l7l:30 43.00 189:0  55.50 206:30 46.75
172:O 44.(n 189:3055;25 .207:O  46.50
172:30 45.00 190:0 55.00 207:30 46.25
173:0  46.00 190:305 4.75 208:0  46 00
173:304 7.00 l9l: 0 54.50 208:30 45.75
174;O  48.00 l9l:30 54.25 209:. 0 45 50
l74z30 49.00 192:0 Sa.OO 209:30 45.25
175:0 50.00 192:3053.75 210:0  45.00
175:305 1.00 t93:0  '53.50 210:30.4 4j5
176:0 52.00 193:30 53.25 2l l: 0 44.50
176:3053.00 194:0 53.00 2l l :30 M.25
177:O 54.00 194:30 52.75 212.0 44.00
177:30 55.00 195:0 52.50 212:304 3.75
178:0  '56.00 195:30 52.25 213:0  43.50

'178:305 7.00 196:0  52.00 2l3t30 43.25
179:O  58.00 196:305 1.75 214:O  43.00
179:30 59.00 197 :0  51 .50 2142304 2.75
180:0  60.00 lf7:30 s1.25 215:0  42.50
180:30 59.75 198 :0  51 .00 215:30 42.25
l8 l :  0  59.50 198:30 50.75 216zO  42.00
l8l:30 59.25 199:0  50.50 2t6|?0 4t.75
182:0  59.00 199:305 O25 217:0  41.50
182:305 8.75 200: 0 50.00 217:fi 41.25
183:0  58.50 200:30 49.75 218:0  41.00
183:30 58.25 201:0 49.50 218:30N.75
184:0 58.00 ' 201:30 49.25 219:O  40.50
184:305 7.75 202:0 49.00 219:3O4 0.25
185:0  57.50 202:30 48.75 22O:0 ,10.00
185:3057.25 203:0 48.50 22430 39.75
186:0 57.00 203:30 48.25 221:O.  39.50
186:30 56.75 204:0 48.00 22t$A }9,25



262 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

Ilcg:nft firupt Deg:MnV iropr Deg:lfin Virupl

fr22 0 39.00 239:30 30.25 257:0  21.50
22223O3 8.75 240:0 30.00 257:30 21.25
2232O  3t.5d' 240:30 29.75 258:0  21.00
1233 0 3t.25 241:0 29.50 258:30 2A.75
224:O 38.00 241:30 29.25 25920  '2200..520
X242303 7.15 ' 242:0 5

29.00 259:30 
2252O  37.50 242:30 28.7s 260:0  20.00
225230 37.2s 243:0 28.50 260:30 19.75
X26:0 37.00 243:30 28.25 261 :0  19 .50
226:30 36.75 244: 0 28.00 261:30 19.25
X27zO  36.50 244:30 27.75 262:0 l9.m
227.30 36.2s 245:O 21.50 262:30 18.75
228:O  36.00 245:30 27.2s 263:O  18.50
22E:30 35J5 246:O 27.N 263:301 8.2S
2292O  35.50 246:30 26.75 264:O  18.00
229t3O 35.25 247:0 26.50 264:30 17.75
23O:0  35.00 247:30 26.25 265:0  12.50
230:30 34.75 248:0 26.00 265:30 17.25
231:0  34.50 248:30 25.75 266:0  12.00
231:30 34.25 249:O 25.50 266:30 t6.Ts
2322O  34.00 249:30 25.25 2672O  16.50
232:,N 33:75 250:0  25.00 267:30 16.25
233:0  33,50 250:30 24.?5 268:0  16.00
233:30 33.25 251:0 24.50 268:30 15.75
234t 0 33.00 251:30 24.25 269:O  t5.50
214:30 32.75 252: O 24.N 269:30 lS.2S
235tO  32.50 252:30 23.75 270:O  15.00
235:30 32.25 253:0 23.50 270:30 14.75
23620 32.00 253:30 23.25 271:O  14.50
236230 31.75 254:0 23.00 271:30 14.25
23720  31.50 254:30 22.75 272:O  14.00
237:30 31.25 255: 0 22.50 272:30 13.75
238:0  31.00 255:30 22.25 273:O  13.50
23t:30 30.75 256:O  22.A0 273:30 13.25
23*, 0 30.50 256:30 21.75 274:0  13.00



alupter 27 263

Deg:Mn Virupa Deg:Mn Virupa Dcg:ltdnV irupr

274:30 12.75 283:0  8.50 '291:30 
4.25

275:0 12.50 283:30 8.25 292: O 4.00
275:30 12.25 284:0  8.00 292230 3.75
2?6:O  12.00 284:30 7.75 293:0 3.5d
277:30 11.75 285:0 7.50 293:30 3.25
276:O 11.50 285:30 7.25 294:0  3.00
277:30 11.25
27*, 0 I r.00 ' 286:0  ?.00 294:30 2.75

286:30 6.75 295:O  2.5O
278:3O 10.75 287:0 6.50 295:30 2.25
279:O  10.50 287:30 6.25 296:A  2.00
279:30 10.25 288:0 6.00 296:fi 1.75
280:0  10.00 288:30 5.75 297:O  1.50
280;30 9.7s 289:0 5.50 297:30 1.25
281:0  9 .50 289:30 5.25 298:0  l.0O
281:30 9.25 290:0  5.00 298;30 .75
282: O 9.00 290:30 4.75 2992O  .50
282:30 8.75 291:O 4.50 299:30 .25

qq grF€itEil&rFli lRetl
Chepte 27

'Evaluation 
Of Strengths

slq Flcaqd q?t ?qr{-ililfirtFrr.rt'l
dtfti <lqt qrutfqt qrq fq{ilalq rr1 r
qrftFs fafq{qei ersqggqqci uiq r

l-lt. STHAANA BALA (upto sloka 6) FIRSTLY
UCECHABAII .'Now about tbe strengthsb y classesp ositional,
temporal etc. (Firstly, Ucbchabala forming part of positional



264 Brihat parasara Hora Sastrd
strength or Sthaanabah). Deduct frcjm the longitude of thc
planet its (decp) debilitation point. If the sum is lcsst han 6
signs,c onsideri t as it isi if it exceeds6  signs,d eductt he samc
from 12 signs. The sum s6 got be converted into degresse tc.
and divided by 3 which is the planet's uchchabatao r exaltation
strength( in Virupas)

Notes : These strengths are called Shadbala. These
consisto f the following :

l. SthaanaB ala (or positionals trength)
2. Dig Bala (or directionals trength)
3. Kala Bala (Temporal Strcngtb) inclusive of Ayana Bala

(or equinoctial strength)
4. CheshtaB ala (or motional strength)
5. NaisargikaB ala (or naturals trength)
6. Drik Bala( or aspectuasl trength)
Thesestrengthsa re computed for the sevenp lanetsf rom

the Sunt o Saturn. The nodesa ronot considered.
Firstly exprainedi s sthaanaB arad ue to a pranet'ep osition.
This strengthc ompriseso f lhe following considerations:  
l. UchchaB ala( or exaltations trength)

' 
2. SaplaiarCajlBala( or strengtha ccruingo ut ofpositions

in Rasi, Hora, _Decailate, Saptamamsa, Navamra,
Dvadasamsa nd Trimsamsa).

' 3. OjhayugmarasiamsaB ala (strength acquiredb y place_ \
rnent in odd/cven Rasi and in odd/cven Navamsaj.

4. Kendradi Bala (due to placement in angte, or
succedenot r cadenth ouse).

5. Drekkana Bala (due to .placement in first, secondo r
third decanateo f a sign).

In thc presentv. ersesu nderc ommentt he sagee xplainst he
mcthod to know the Uchchabalao f a planet. To find out this
strength, wc nced two tbiogs. Firstly the planet,s actual
longitude. secondlyi ts debilitationp oint which is constant for
all horoscopos' The deep debiritationpoints of the 7 planets
are noted on pp 38-39s upra.

For example,a ssumeth e Sun's placement in a given case
is Pisces12" 

'Libra l5' (or 342" r5'). His deep debiritatiori point is
l0' (or 190"). Hence :



Chapter2 7 26s
(Sun'sp osition-Deep debilitationp oint)+  3
:342o15'  minus1 90 '

3
: I 52' I 5' -- 3: 50.25 Virupas

If the sumbefored ivisionb y 3 is in excesso f lg0 degrees
deducitt  from 360 and then divide by 3 which will bet hc
plairet's uchchab ala in Virupas. Marimum Uchchab ala is
always6 0 shashtiamsaosr  I Rupa.

€farlq+qriqrfaftT"ftrdffrTR{' uRtl
qfqflflt qrfq ftqrnt $qrri rilI I
xtT6utt: qrfiq*nftau* il gqT:$ tT: itQtl
qq qkqnrqrfr-qrqto-a rcri rtqq r
ffi il*rqsq ecaqttcglqqq nytl

2-4. SAPTAVARGAJA BALA.. If a planet is in its
Moolatrikona Rasi, it gets4 5 Virupas, in own Rasi 30 Virupas,
cxtreme. friend's Rasi 20 Virupas, friend's Rasi 15 Virupas,
neutral's Rasi l0 Virupas, enemy's Rasi 4 Virr:pas and in
extremeenemy'sR asi 2 Virupas. Slmilarly those values occur
for the other 6 divisional occupations,u '2. Hora, Decanate,
SaptamamsaN. avamm, Dvadasamsaa nd Trimsamsa. When all
th.c: are added togeth€r the planet'b SaptavargajaB ala emerges.

Notes : Next step is to find out thc Saptavargajab ala of a
planet. The tablesof varioue Vargasa s well as the compound
relationshipso f the planets,a re given in the previousp ag.r. T.be
compound relationshipso f two given planets, vide p. i2 npra
(including Hora lordship etc.) be seen in thc Rasi chart only
and not in the concerned divisional chart. Then the strengths
in Virupas for oach of the Saptavargasb e found out and added,
which is then called saptavargajab ala of the planet.

{*t( sqqiisr} fqqlsr.fErfnd eeq r
4tr. OJHAYUGMARASIAMSA BALA .. Each of Venus

and the Moon in cven Rasis and others in odd Rasisa cquire a
quarter of Rupa (i.e. 15 Virupas). Thesea re applicablet o such
Navamsasalso"



266 Brihat pdrasara Hom Sastra
. Notcs : Each of Jupiter, the Sun, Mars, Mercury and
Saturng et 15 Virupasi f they are placed in odd Rasis. Venus
and the Moon get similar strengthf or placemenitn  an even
rign. Similarlyf or placemenitn  such odd or evenNavatrsas.
The rtrengthsa cquiredb y Rasia nd Navamsap ositionsb e atlded
together to know the Ojhayugmarasiamsbaa la. (Male aad
neutral planets get this strength in male Rasi/Navamsa.
Female planetsg et such strengthi n female Rasi/Navamsa.)

trnfEgR qilT:< iar:g ursf ufs g..fuirTf rit rnfr | | I Ir 
5. KENDRADI BILA.. A planet in an angle getsf ull

;trength while one in succedenth ouseg etsb alfand the one in
cadenth ouseg etsa  quarter(of Rupa)( as Kendradib ala),

Notes : Kendradi means angles etc. This denotest hree
groupso f four Rasise ach.. Thesea re angles,( i.e. lst, 4th, Zth
and l0th) succedents(i,. e. 2nd, sth, 8th and llth) and cadents,
(i e. 3rd, 6th, 9th and l2rh). The following are the Kendradi
balas : . I

(l) Planeti n angle:60 Virupas
(2) Planeti n succedent:3OV irupas
(3) Planeti n cadent:15 Virupas

BTrilqsrTrqqirfiygd t ficii, Sfi,
tqts{'q}qTaqra qt&:Erfqii *r{ rrqii

, 6. DREKKANA BALA': |vlale, female and .hernaphro-
dite planetsr espectively g9t a quarter Ruln acbordingt o
placementsi n the first, secondarrd third decaqatcs, .

Notes : This strengthi s acquiredb y a plapetw itf.Xeferen-
ce to its decanatep ositionb eingi n lhe lst..?n4or 3rd iqrt of a
sign. Male planetsa re : the Sun,M ars, a4d 'Jppiter. 

female
planets 

.are. Venus_and.t he .{oon-. _! 1tp1+, a;rd Mercury are
eunuchb odies. A Drekkanab alao f l5 Virupai will beacquired
by planetsa s under :

Male planet in lst Drelckana.
Femalep lanet in 2nd Drekkana.
Eunuchp lanbti n 3rd Drekkana.
For calculationso f Drekkana, seeS peculumo f Drekkanas,

supra. Ncedlesst o mention that if the Drekkana position is



Clapter 27 261
othert han what is required,t hen the strengtho n this counti s
nil. Thisstrengthis  alsoc alledL ingaB ala.

Tbe Balass of ar acquired,viz(.l ) Uchchab ala,( 2) Saptava-
rgajab ala,( 3) Ojhayugmarasiambsaala , (4) Kendradib alaa nd
(5) Drekkanab ala be all added togethert o get net Sthaanab ala
or positional strength. These are in Virupas and hence bc
divided by 60 to know the strength in Rupas.

- qqh gqrq {<i, dtqwiloqrsedm rqrftr: r
qltd q tq]{ir?tq f(eqrq qflfir+ sfr rrsrr
q{q fc{ilgqf ,EqTlrRrfrr{ffinqf erncq r

7-71. DTGBALA OR DTRECTTONAL STRENGTH :
Deduct the 4th house( i.e. Nadir) from the longitudeso f

Sun and Mars; the ?th house (i.e. descendant)f rom that of
Jupitera nd Mercury; tb€ 10thhouse( i.e. meridian)f rom that of
Venusa nd the Moon; and lastly the agcendantf rom that of
Saturn. If the sum is above 180 degreesd educt the sum from
360. The sum arrived in either way be dividedb y 3 which will
be thepigbala (or directionals trength)  of the planet.

, Notes : As seene arlier,Jupiter and Mercuryh aveD igbata
ln the ascendant. Venusand the Moon have this bala in the
4th hquse( i e, Nadir), Saturn in tho descendanat nd the Sun and
Matq op the meridian. These strengthsa re full on the cuspo f
the respectiveh ouseand nil on the cusp of the oppositeh ouse.
Hence note down the longitude of.the concernedp lanet and the
cuspal degree on which it is bereft of directional strength.
Deduct the latter from the former. If the product exceeds1 80'
deduct the same again from 360. The sum so arrived at be
{iviaed by 3, which will denote the Digbala of the planet in
Virupas. The directional strengtha cquired by a planet when it
is oq its most, powerful point is I Rupa or 60 Virupas. For
exami,leS aturn exactly on the 7th cusp gets I Rupa, and exactly
on the ascending degree gets zero Virupa as directional
strength.

gtfrrraE fd{ilqrir.nd fenrcgii i?{{ netl
qirqlq-rtflii q qd EE i rqrfqrq r
qf*qd ir*tqi qil F{ gaer fE nall



268 &filwt Parasara Hora fustrd

8.9, KAALA B.'LA OR TEMPORAL STRENGTH
(upto sloka 17) : Firstly NATHONNATHA BALA. Find out
the differenceb etweenm idnight and apparent birth time which
is called Unnata. Deduct Unnata from 30 ghatis to obhin Nata
(rc). Double the Nata in ghatis which wilt indicate idcntical
Natha bala for the Moon, Mars and Saturn. Deduct the Natha
from 60 to know the Unnatha bala of the Sun, Jupiter and
Venus. Mercury, irrespective of day and night, gets full
NathonnathaB ala (i.e. of I Rupa or 60 Virupas).

Notes : Kaala Bata (or temporal strength) comprises of
the following sub divisions: 

l) NathonnathaB ala (diurnal and nocturnal strengths).
2) PakshaBala (Paksha:fortnight).
3) Tribhaga Bala (strengthd ue to day/nigbt bclqg'msdei n

3 parts).
4') Varsha-Masa-Dina-Hora Bala (Varsha:astrological

year, Masa:month, Dina:week day and Hora:.
planetaryh our).

5) Ayana Bala (equinoctials trenglh).
6) Yudhdha Bala (strengthd ue to partaking in planetary

war).
Though Naisargikab ala discussedi n betweeni n stota 14,

this is an independent sours€ .of strength without referenceto 
Kala bala.

Firstly Nathonnatabala, Moon, Mars and Saturn cet this
strengthi n the night. The Sun,J upit-era nd Venuse eti iurnat
ctr.engtho r strengthi n-$ ay time. The sameV irupas oT stren4h
vill be identically h-eldb y atl the planets of each group. T[at
is whatever will be the Sun's-Nathonnatas treigifi-wili be
identically held by Jupiter and Venus. Simitarly- ine otbei
group.

Fornula : Natha ghatis( apparent) x 
. 2:Natha bala for

Moon group.
50-Moon's NathaB ala:Bala for Sun group

. It{eqcurya. lw-ay,gse ts l_R upa as Nathonnatha bala irrespe-
ctive of the birth beingi n day or night time.

Another simplemethod is asunder :
Natha Bala : Brith time in degrces

3
Unnatha Bala : ltO Minus birth'time in.degrees



Chapter 27 269

For this purposec ount from apparent midnight to birth
time at the rate of one degree per minute of time, or 15" per
hour. This will convert the birth time into degreese tc.

Erqrq ffqd ntt qri watq fknttq q t
qs.qlfqt RrilearctEsn rftFqf aft{iq u I otl
qHd R qftea:r 

9

fr{t}eq ilc{Ff ilq qFffit qeNqirq illtrl
l0-ll. PAKSHA BALA .' Deduct from the Moon's longi-

tude tbat of the Sun. If the sum exceeds6  signs, deduct the
same from 12. The product so obtained be convertedi nto
desreese tc,. and divided by 3 which will indicate the Paksha
baia of each of the beneficp lanets. The Pakshabala of benefic
shouldb e deducted from 60 which will go to eachmalefic as
Pakshab ala.

Notes : Pakshab ala is decidedo n the follo'wing basis :
Pakshabala for tenefic : Moon minus Sun

Pakshab ala for malefic :60 minus benefic'sP akshab ala,
'Beneficsf orm one group and eachof them will get the

samef igure of Pakshab ata. (Mercury is to be treated as a
malefic-if he is conjunct a malefic. The Moon in dark half is a
mut.n".1 The bala of beneficsshould be deductedf rom 6o to
geta malefic'sPakshabalaIf.  Moon-Sun isabovel 80,dcduct
il*;i"'r'.i;er 

theM ooni s in a sroupo r u.n.i'", or otherwise,
her Pakshab ala is alwaysd oubledj ust as the Sun's Ayana bala.

Rnxiig qlranii'-nnflfqfi, firraEffeemqFqrtt  tr
rrrrlrTdiEt|qi q qFf goi {rfi g*: tt.13tt

12. TRIBHAGA BALA .' One Rupa is obtained by
Mercury (if birth is) in the first one third part of day time,. by
thc Sun in the secondo ne third part of the day and by Saturn in
the last third part of the day. Similarly, the Moon, Venus and
Mars get full strength (of one Rupa) in the first, secondand
last one third parts of the night. Jupiter gets this strengthat
all times.

$



210 Brihat ParasaraHora Sastra

Notes : This strength goes to one planeto nly, as I rupa.
Jupiter, bowevef,gcts I Rupa irrespectiveo f birth time.

Thc day duration or night duration according to birth
beingi n day or night must be dividedby 3. With the follgwing
table, Tribhaga bala can be kaown, according to thc birth
being :

in lst patt of day:1 Rupa to Mercury
in 2nd part of day:1 Rupa to the Sun
in 3rd part of day:1 Rupa to Saturn

. in lst part of night:l Rupa to the Moon
in 2nd part of nighl:1 Rupa to Venus
in 3rd part of night:l Rupa to Mars

. at any time:l Rupa to Jupiter
Thus two planetsw ill get I Rupa of Tribhaga bala. ThBt

is I Rupa to Jppiter and I Rupa to the respectivep lanet in
whosep art the birth occurs. The other 5 planetsd o uot get aDy
Tribhaga bala.

qdrTrqfainr{t fauqfraqt-'q'q{q: t
Anfiq qd qfktlii *nttrri gil n l t t l

I3. VARSHA-MAASA-DINA.HORAB ALA .. I5,.30, 45
and 60 Virupas are in order given to Varsha lord, Maasal ord
Dina lord and Hora lord. Naisargikab ala (or natural,strength)
hasa lreadybeenexplained.

Notes : Under this hqadiiry, four different planets get
certainV irupas. Theses trengthsa re :

Varsha( Abda) lord : 15 ViruPas
Masa (nronth) lord = 30V irupas'
Dina (day) lord : 45 Virupas
Hora (hour) lord : 60 Virupas

How to decidet he saidl ordshipsi s explaineda s under.
Varsha lord : Astrological year is different from othet

mcasures. The day on which the astrologicaly ear begins can
be found out from the Speculum of abbreviatedA harganas,
vide p.272.T o know the Varsbal ord we shouldf irst ascertaint he
number of days past from thc beginning of Creation. This is a
very tedious process and hence we are concernedw ith the
abbreviated Ahargana (or the number of days past from



Chapter 27 .' 271
Creation). According to late Rev. Ebenezer Burgess, who
translatedS urya Siddhantain Englisb, as on January l, 1g60,
the number of dlys past from the beginning of Creation are
714,404,1085, 73.

To know tho day on which the astrologicalyear in which
birth took placeb eganadopt ihe following formula. Divide the
number of days past from the day of Crcation till the day of
birth by .60. Rejoot remainder and mulriply the qgotient by
3. Increasct he post-multiplied product by I and divide by 7.
The remainderw ill indicatc the week day on which the astrolo-
gical year giving birth to the native opened. Remainder I
indicatesS unday, 2 Monday and so on and so forth.

Assumet hat birth took place on June l, 1984. Locate
from the Speculum of Abbreviated Aharganasf or January O
date 1984a s 65142. Add 153 being the numbero f d4ysu pto
the day of birth (inclusivc thc birth date). Thus we get abbre-
viated days past from crcation to birth as 65295. This product
ihen divided by 3CI yields a quotient of l8l. Ramaindcr is to
te rejected. l8I multiplied by 3 indicates543. Increasedb y l,
this gives5 44. When 544 is divided by 7, thc remainderi s 5.
That is, the astrological year of birth for one born on June l,
1984 began on a Thursday. Hence this strengtho r Varsha
bala goest o Jupiter, the ruler of Thursday

Mgsa Iord ; Divide the same Ahargana by 30 and the
quotient (devoid of remainder) iodi*t"r' months passedf rom
Creationt o birth. The completed months be multiplied by 2
gnd increasedb y l. The Iatests um should be divided by Z and
the remainder indicates on which the birth month began.
Continuing with the same case, we divide 65295 by 30.
Quotienti s 2176. This sum multiplied by 2 and increasedb y
I .denot€s4 353. Dividing 4353 by 7, we get a remaindero f 6
denoting Friday. That is, the month of birth begano n Friday
and lhe Masa bala goest o Venus,t he lord of Friday.

Dim lord : Though the week day of birth can be known
from ephemeris or perpetual calendars,w e better adopt the
method prescribed which will confirm if the Ahargana followed
iscorrect or is otherwise. The number of tr,.ys as arrived above
indicating Ahargana be divided by 7 and the remainder will
indicate the week day of birtb. In the examplec ase6 5295



272 Brihat ParasaraHora S.astra

dividedb y ? leavesa  remainder of 6. That is June 1,1984i s
Friday. Hencet he Aharganaf ollowed by us is correct. While
consideringD ina bala, the birth should be treated from sunris€
to sunrise.

Hence in this case,t he Dina bala goes to Venus,r uler of
ttto"t;oruBara 

: Hora meansp lanetaryh our. Eachday from
runriset o sunrisei s divided into 24 equalp arts of one hour or
2.5 ghatikas. TheseH orasare ruled by the 7 planetsf rom the
Sun to Saturn. The first Flora of the day is ruled by the lord
of the weekd ay. The 2nd one is ruled by the lord of the 6th
weekd ay countedf rom the first ruler. The 3rd Hora is ruled
by fte lord of tbe 6th week day countedf rom the 2nd Hora
lord. Similarly it proceedsi n the same mannert ill the first
Hora of the next day is taken over by the lord of that. day
himself. Whicheverp lanet rules the birth Hora getst he Hora
Bala. Horas are to be calculated for mean local time and ngt
standardt ime of birth.

For easy ,referince, consult the Speculum of Horas
Vide infra.

Speculumo f AbbreviatedAharganaf or Januaiy 0

Yr. Ahargana Yr. Ahargana Yr.

18 00  4s8 ' t 813 2686 I  8 2 6  7 4 3 4
I  801  823 1814 30sI  1827 7799
t 802  l l 88 lS l s 34t6 1 8 2 8 *  8 1 6 4
1803  1553 l8 l 6 * 378I 1 8 2 9  8 5 3 0
1804 f  l 9 l 8 t  8 l 7 4 t4 7 I  8 3 q  8 E 9 5
1805  2284 l8 l 8 45 t2 l 8 3 l '  9 2 6 0
1806  2649 ' t 8 l 9 4877 I  8 3 2 *  9 6 2 5
1807 .  494 I  820 r 5242 r  8 3 3 .  9 9 9 1
I  808*  859 l82 l 56 08 I  8 3 4  1 0 3 5 6
1809 1225 1822 5963 I  8 3 5  1 0 7 2 1
l 8 l 0  1590 1823 . 6338 I  8 3 6 . r  I  1 0 8 6
181I 1955 1E24t 6703 1S37 r1452
I t l 21  2120 r  t25 7069 1 8 3 8  l l 8 l 7



Clapter 27 273

Yr. Ahargano Yr. Ahargena Yr. Ahrrgur

I  8 3 9 t2 t82 I  8 7 5 25334 t9 t  I  38479
I  8 4 0 * 12547 1876 * 25696 19t2r'  38844
t  8 4 1 t 2 9 t 3 t 8 7 7 26062 r9 l3  392 tO
1842 1 3 2 7 8 I  8 7 8 26427 t9 t4  39575
I  8 4 3 13643 1879 26792 . t 9 t5  39940
1844* I  4 0 0 8 I  8 8 0 * 271s7 t9t6t  40305
I  8 4 5 1 4 3 7 4 t88 r 27s 23 t9t7 4067r
I  8 4 6 1 4 73 9 I  8 8 2 27888 r9 r8  41036
r847 r 5 f 0 4 I 8 8 3 28253 l9 t9  41401
1 8 4 8 r 15469 18 8 4 1 286 r8 t 920 .41766
I  8 4 9 1 5 8 3 5 I  8 8 5 28984 r92t 42132
I  8 5 0 I  6 2 0 0 1 8 8 6 29349 t922 42497
l 8 5 l l  6 5 6 5 I  8 8 7 297t 4 t923 42862
1852' l  6 9 3 0 I  8 8 8 * 30079 1924| 43227
I  8 5 3 t7296 I  8 8 9 30445 1925 43593
I  8 5 4 t 7  6 6 1 I  8 9 0 30810 1926  43958
I  8 5 5 I  8 0 2 6 I  8 9 1 3 t l 7  5 t927 44323
1 8 5 6 r r 8 3 9 1 1892l 31540 1928e4 4688
I  8 5 7 t87  57 t  8 9 3 31906 1929 4s054
8s8 19122 I  8 9 4 3227|  1930  45419
859 t9487 I  8 9 5 32636 l93 t  45784
860r I  9 8 5 2 [  8 9 6 * 33001 19321 46149
861 202r8 I  8 9 7 33367 1933  46s ' ! . 5

t862 20583 . 18 9 8 3373 2 1934  46880
I  863 20948 1 8 9 9 34091 1935  47245
I  864 r 213r3 I  900 34462 1936*  47610
I  865 2r679 I  9 0 1 34827 1937 47976
t  866 22044 1902 35r92 1938  48341
r867 22409 I  9 0 3 35557 1939 48706
I  868 r 22774 I  904* 35922 194014 9071
I  869 23r40 I  9 0 5 36288 1941 49437
I  870 2350s I  9 0 6 366s3 1942 49802
l87 l 23870 I  907 37018 t943  50167
1872* 24235 l 908 l t 37383 t944s 50532
t  873 2460r I  9 0 9 3774 9 1945  50898
1874 24966 l 9r 0 38114 1946 51263



274 Brihat ParasaraH ora Sastra

Yr. Abargrnr Yr. Abargana Yr. Abargana

1947  51628 I  9 6 s  5 8 2 0 3 I  9 8 3  6 4 7 7 7
1948 t  51993 1 9 6 6  5 8 5 6 8 1 9 8 4 f  6 5 1 4 2
r949 52359 t 9 6 7  5 8 9 3 3 l  9 8 5  6 5 5 0 8
r950  52724 1 9 6 8 1  5 9 2 9 8 r  9 8 6  6 5 8 7 3
r  95I  53089 I  9 6 9  5 9 6 6 4 1987 66238
t952* 53454 t 9 7 0  6 0 0 2 9 r  9 8 8 1  6 6 6 0 3
I  9s3  53820 1 9 7|  6 0 3 9 4 I  9 8 9  6 6 9 6 9
r  954  5418 5 t972*  60759 I  9 9 0  6 7 3 3 4
I  955  54550 t913  6r125 l99 t  67699
1956*5 4915 t 9 7 4  6 1 4 9 0 t 9 9 2 *  6 8 0 6 4
1957  55281 t 9 7 5  6 1 8 5 5 l  9 9 3  6 8 4 3 0
l  958  55646 1976r 62220 t 9 9 4  6 8 7 9 5
1959  5601I  1 9 7 7  6 2 5 8 6 1 9 9 5  6 9 1 6 0
196015 6376 1 9 7 8  6 2 9 5l  1 9 9 6 n  6 9 5 2 5
l 96 t  56742 r 9 7 9  6 3 3I  6 t 9 9 7  6 9 8 9I 
t962 57107 1 9 8 0 * ' 6634608417 1 9 9 8  7 0 2 s 6
1963  . 574 72 l 9 8 l  t999 70621
196415 7837 1 9 8 2  6 4 4 1 2

r Lerp Years.

CommonY eors-Deysf or ZeroDrtes of Months

Date Days Date Days Dete Days

Jan. 0 0 M a y  0  t 2 0 Sept.0 243
Feb. 0 3 l June 0 I 5l oct. 0 273
Mar .0 59 Ju ly  0  l8 l Nov. 0 304
Apri l0 90 Aug.0  212 Dec. 0 334

Ieap Yers-Days for Zero Drtes of Months

Dete Days Date Deys Date Days

Jan. 0 0 May 0 t2 l Sept0.  244
Feb. 0 ?r June 0 r52 w. 0 274
M a r . 0 60 July 0 182 Nov.0  305
Apri l0 91 Aug. 0 2r3 Dec.0  335



Chapter 27 27,5

Speculumo f Horas

Hora Sun Mon Tbe Wed Thu Frl Sgt

l . Sun Moon Mar Merc JuP Ven Sat

2 . . Ven Sat Sun Moon Mar Merc JuP

3. Merc JuP Ven Sat Sun Moon Mar

4. Moon Mar Merc JUP Ven Sat Sun

5. Sat Sun Moon lvrar Merc JuP Ven

6. Jup Ven Sat Sun Moon Mars Merc

7. Mars Merc JuP Ven Sat Sun Moon

8. Sun Moon Mars Merc JuP Ven Sat

9. Ven Sat Sun Moon Mars Merc JuP

10. Merc JuP Ven Sat Sun Moon Mars

11 . Moon Mars Merc JuP . Ven Sat 'Sun

12. Sat S,ln Moon Mars Merc JuP Ven

13 . Jup Ven Sat Sun Moon Mars Mere

14. Mars Merc JuP Ven Sat Sun Moon

15 . Sun Moon Mars Merc JuP Ven Sat

16. Ven Sat Sun Moon Mars Merc JuP
'Merc 

17. JuP Ven Sat Sun Moon Mars

18. Moon Mars Merc JuP Ven Sat - Sun

19. Sat Sun Moon Mars Merc JuP Ven

20. Jup V.l Sqt Sun Moon Mars Merc

21. Mars Merc JUP Ven Sat Sun Moon

22. Sun Moon Mars Merc JuP Ven Sat

23. Ven Sat Sun Moon Mars Merc JuP

24. Merc JuP Ven Sat Sun Moon Mars



276 Brihat Paravra Hora Sastra

$aqqqfsatmddai{ei t
*rrdl fcq!  trtvtr

14. NAISARGIKA BALA (NATURAL STRENGTH) :
Divide one Rupa (or 60 Virupas)b y 7 and multiply the resultant
product by I to 7 separatelyw hich will indicate the Natural
Strengthd ue to Saturn, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, the
Moon and the Sun, respectively.

Notes : As per the abover ule, the Naisargika Bala in
Rupas are indicated below so that the reader need not calculate
himsclf.

. Sun : l.(X[ Rupa
Moon: 0.857R upa
Mars : 0.286R upa

. Merc - 0.429 Rupa
JuP : 0'571R urra
Ven : 0.714R upa
Sat : 0.143R upa

This strengthi s acquiredb y a planet due to its luminosity.
The brightestg etst he highest Naisargika Bala while the least
bright glts ttre leastNaisargikaB ala. The Sun is the brightest
amongt he 7 planetsw hile Saturni s the darkest. The brightness
ofthe planetsc an be guessedfr om the abovef igures.

This is an independenst trengtha nd has nothingt o do with
. Kala Bala, and is constantf or all nativities and for ever. Hence
no individualc alculationsn eedbe done.

NaisargikaB ala hasa significanut se in the Shadbala. If
two planetsa re of equal Shadbala, then the one with higher
Naisargika Bala prevails over the other.

rtrttfi€Fl: w: sqf: qou'6,i{r:w rqfr t
wqir{qlnfirqeqqrs$drv fi [l {tl
q1ilftr,Eilrfuatn fenrmugar FrqrI: 
FqToi qqM rfi.etq f"ffiIullrtl
ilqrss(Idaq{fiori qd, f,Tq fiil uil I
n{flqnq fefuim iqqTqftf ad{nlstl



Chapter 27 277

15-17A YANA BALA : 45, 33 and 12 are the Khandas
for calculatingA yana Bala. Add Ayanamsat o the planet (for
which Ayana Bala is required)a nd find out the Bhuja (distance
from the neareste quinox). Add the figurec orrespondingto  the
Rasi( of the Bhuja)t o thc Bhuja. The degreese tc. of the Bhuja
(devoido f Rasi)b e multipliedb y the figure correspondingto  the
higher of the left out Khandas and divided by 30. Add the
resultant product to the sum obtained earlier. Convert this
into Rasi etc. lf the Moon and Saturn are in Libra or ahead
add to this 3 Rasis,a nd if in Aries to Virgo reducef rom 3 Rasis.
Similarlyi t is reversef or the Sun, Mars, Venusa nd Jupiter,( i.e.
additiono r deductioni r converse). For Mercury 3 Rasisare
alwaysa dditive. The resultants um in Rasi,d egreesa nd minutes
be dividedb y 3 to get the AyauaB ala in Rupas'

Notes : Ayana Bala can be found out on the following
simplef ormula.

AyanaB ala:  2t 27- !\r!anti X OO

-(23"27' plus or minusK ranti) x 1.2793

The following pointshavet o be rememberedin  respecto f
of Krantis. when the Moon or Saturnh aves outhernK ranti or
whent he Sun,M ars, Jupitero r Venush aveN orthernK ranti, take
plus. In a contrarys ituationi n respecto f these6 planets,t ake
minus. As far as Mercury is concerned' it is always plus
whetherh e has southern Kranti or Northern Kranti. Krantis
(or declinations)c an be ascertained from standard modern
ephemeris.

The Sun'sA yana Bala is againm ultiplied by 2 whereasfo r
o thers theproduc tar r i ved inV i rupas iscons ideredas i t i s .

The following speculumw ill help the readert o easilywork
out the Ayana Bala,w hent he Kranti of a planeti s known'



218 Brihat ParasardH ora Sastra

Specnlumo f Ayanr Bela

Kruti Ayrna Krenti Ayrnt Krrnti Ayrna
+ Bde ! Bela + Bals

23" 27', 23" 27', 23" 27',
o a

00 0.0 ;;, 3.r 5 r0 6.6
05 0.1 239 t.4 5 14 6.7
09 o.2 2U 3.s 5 19 6.8
014 03 249 3.6 5 24 6.9
019 0.4 2s4 3.7 5 28 7.O
023 0.5 258 3.8 5 33 ?.1
o28 0.6 33 3.9 5 38 7.2
033 0.7 38 4.0 5 42 7.3
038 0.8 312 4 .1 5 47 7.4
o42 0.9 317 4.2 5 s2 7.5
o47 1.0 t22 4.3 5 56 7.6
os2 t . l 426 4.4 6 t  7 .7
056 1.2 331 4.5 66  7 .8
t r 1 .3 336 4.6 6 l l  7 . )
: ( t .4 340 4.7 6 15 8.0
l l G 1 .5 345 4.t 6 20 8.1
l rs t .6 350 4.9 6 2s 8.2
120 1.7 355 5.0 6 29 8.3
124 l .E 359 5 .1 6 34 8.4
129 1.9 44 - 5.2 6 39 8.5
134 2.C 49 5.3 6 43 8.6
l 3E 2.1 413 5.4 6 48 8.7
143 2.2 418 5.5 6 53 E.8
148 2.3 423 5.6 6 57 8.9
153 2..4 427 5.7 72  9 .0
l s7 2.5 432 5.8 77  9 .1
22 2.6 431 5.9 7 t r  9 .2
27 2.7 44 r 6.0 7 16 9.3
2rr 2.8 446 6.1 7 2t 9.4
216 2.9 451 6.2 7 26 9.5
22r 3"0 455 6.3 7 30 9.6
225 3.1 50 6.4 7 35 9.7
230 ,.2 55 6.5 7N 9.8



Chapter 27 n9

Kranti Ayana Knnti Ayana Kranll Ayanr
+ Bda + Balr + 8dr

23'27', 23'27', 23"27'.
O t

'9.9
7 44 l0 24 13.3 13 3 16.7
7 49 10.0 t0 28 13.4 13 8 16.8
7 54 l0. l ld 33 l 3 . 5 t3  13 16.9
7 58 10.2 l0  38 1 3 . 6 13t 7 17.0
8 3 10.3 l0  43 t3.7 132 2 tT. l
I 8 10.4 l0 47 13.8 1327 17.2
8 12  10 .5 l0 52 t3.9 133 l  t7 .3
8 l7 10.6 l0 57 t4.0 133 6 -  r7 .4
I22  10 .7 l l  I l4. l 134 l t7.5
I27  10 .8 ' 1 l  6 t4.2 134s t7.6
8 31 10.9 l l  l l t4.3 .135 0 t7.7
8 36  11 .0 I  I  l 5 t4.4 1355 17.8
8  4 l  l l . l l l 20 t4.5 14 0 t7 .9
8 45 ll.2 t t  25 14.6 t4 4 18.0
8  5 0  l l . 3 t l  29 14.7 t4  9 l8 . l
8 55 l l .4 l l 34 14.8 t4 t4 t8.2
8  5 9  l l . 5 139 14.9 14l 8  . 18 .3
9  4  l l . 6 144 15.0 t4 23 18.4
9 9 ll.7 148 15I.  1428 18.5
9 1 3  l l . 8 l l  53 1 5 2 t4 32 t8.6
9  1 8  l l . 9 .  l l  58 15.3 t4 37 18.7
9 23 12.0 122 15.4 t4 42 18.8
9 27 l2.r 127 15.5 t4 46 18.9
9 32 12.2 t2  t2 1 5 . 6 t4 5l 19.0
9 37 r2.3 t2  16 ts.7 1456 19. l
9 42 12.4 t2  2 l 15.8 ls 0 19.2
9 46 l2.s 1226 15.9 t.5 5 19.3
9 51 12.6 1230 16.0 15l 0 t9.4
9 56 12.7 t2 35 l6. l 1515 19.5.

r0 0 12.8 t2 40 16.2 1519 19.6
l0 5 t2.9 t2 44 16.3 152 4 lg,7
t0 r0 13.0 t2 49 16.4 t5 29 19.8
r0  14  l 3 . l t2  54 16.5 153 3 19.9
l0 19 13.2 t2 59 t6.6 l5 38 20.0



2E0 Brihat ParasaraHora Sastra

fr.Dtl Ayrnr Krantl Ayau Krenti Ayana
+ Bdr + Bela + Bela

230 27', 23'27', 23" 27'.
o a

1543 20.1 t8 22 23.s 2t 2 26.9
154 7 20.2 t8 27 23.6 21 6 27.0
t5 52 20.3 l8 32 23.7 2 t  t t  27 .1
t5 57 20.4 l8 36 23.8 2 t t 6  272
16  I  20 .5 ' 1841 23.9 2t 20 27.3
16 6 20.6 184 6 24.0 2t 25 27.4
16 I r 20.7 185 0 24.1 213 0 27.5
1616 20.8 1855 24.2 2134 27.6
t6 2C 20.9 19 0 24.3 2t 39 27.7
162 5 2t .0 19 4 24.4 2l44 27.8
163 0 2t.l t9 9 24.s 2149  279
16 34 21.2 19 14 24.6 2t 53 28.0
16 39 2i.3 t9 18 24.7 21 58 2S.l
t6 u 21.4 t9 23 24.8 22 3 28.2
164 8 2t.5 l9 28 24.9 22 7 28.3
1653 21.6 1933 25.0 22 12 28.4
1658 2t.7 t9 37 25.1 22 17 28.5
t7 2 2r.8 t9 42 2s.2 22 2t 28.6
t7 7 2t.9 t9 4? 2s.3 22 2.6 28.7
t7 t2 t\.o 195 1 2s.4 223 t 28.8
t7 t6 22.r 1956 25.5 22 35 2E.9
t7 21 22.2 20 | 25.6
t7 26 22.3 20 s '25.7 22 & 29.0

22 4s 29,1
l7 3t 22.4 20 l0 25.8 22 49 . 29.2
t7 35 22.s 20 rs .25.9 22 s4 29.3
t7 6 22.6 20 19 26.0 22 59 29.4
t7 45 22.? 20 24 26.1 23 4 29.5
r7 49 22.8 20 29 26.2 23 8 29.6
t7 s4 22.9 20 33 26.3 23 13 29.7
t7 59 23.O 20 38 26.4 23 t8 29.E
18 3 23.r 20 43 26.5 23 22 29.9
18 8 23.2 20 48 26.6 232 7 30.0
l8 13 23.3 20 s2 26.7 233 2 30.1
tE l7 23.4 20 51 26.8 23 36 30.2



Chapter2 7 281

Krauti Ayena Kranti Ayane Kranti Ayana
t Bah + Bala + Bala

23"2 7', .23" 27', 23"2 7',

ZS+ ,t 30.3 26 21 33.7 29 0 37.1
23 46 30.4 2625 33.8 29 5 3'.1.2
23 50 30.5 2630 33.9 29 9 37.3
235 5 30.6 26 35 34.0 29 rl  37.4
24 0 30.7 26 39 34.1 29 19 37.5
24 5 30.8 26 41 34.2 2923 37.6
24 9 30.9 26 49 34.3 2928 37.7
241 4  31 .0 26 53 34.4 293 3 37.8
24t 9  3 l . l 26 58 34.5 29 38 37.9
2423 3t.2 27 3 34.6 294 2 38.0
242 8 31.3 27 7 34.7 294 ',t 38.1

'29 
24 33 3t.4 27 12 34.8 52 38.2
243 7 3r .5 27 17 34.9 2956 38.3
244 2 31.6 272 2 35.0 30 I 38.4
24 47 31.7 2726 3s.l 30 6 38.5
2451 31.8 27 31 35.2 30l 0 38.6
245 6 31.9 27 36 35.3 3015 38.7
25 | 320 27 40 35.4 3020 38.8
25 5 32.r 274 5 35.5 302 4 38.9
25 r0 32.2 27 50 35.6 3029 39.0
25 r5 32.3 27 54 35.7 3034 39.1
is zo 32.4 27 59 35.8 ' 30 38 39.2
25 24 32.5 28 4 35.9 3043 19.3
252 9 326 28 8 36.0 304 8 39.4
25 34 32.7 28 13 36.1 3053 39.5
25 38 32.8 28 lE 36.2 305 7 39.6
25 43 32.9 28 22 36.3 31 2 39.7
25 48 33.0 28 27 36.4 31 7 39.8
255 2 33.1 28 32 36.5 3l I I 39.9
25 s7 33.2 28 37 36.6 3l 16 40.0
26 2 33.3 28 41 36.7 3t  2 t  40.1
26 6 33.4 284  36.8 3t 25 40.2
26 rl  33.5 28 51 36.9 3130 40.3
26 16 33.6 28 55 37.0 313 5 40.4



282 Brihat Parasara Eora Sastra

Kranti Ayana Kranti Ayana Kranti Ayana
+ Bala + Balo + Bala

2? '27 ' , 23" 27', 23'27',

,, ,n 40.5 ,O rt, 43.g 36 58 47.3
314 4 40.6 34 24 44.0 37 3 47.4
314 9 40.1 34 28 44.1 37 g 47.5
3t 54 40.8 34 33 4:4.2 37 t2 47.6
315 8 40.9 34 38 44.3 37 t7 47.7
32  3  410 34 42 14.4 37 22 47.8
32  8  4 l . l 34 47 44.5 ,7 27 47.9
32 12 4r.2 34 52 44.6 37 3t 48.0
32t 7  41 .3 34 s6 44.7 37 36 48.r
322 2 4t.4 35 I  44.8 37 41 48.2
322 6 4 l .s 35 6 44.9 g7 45 48.3
323 1 41.6 35 1l  45.0 37 50 48.4
32 36 4t.7 35 15  45 .1 37 55 48.5
3240 418 35 20 45.2 37 59 48.6
324 5 4r.9 35 2s 45.3 38 4 48.7
32 50 42.0 35 29 45.4 38 9 48.8
32s 4 42.1 35 34 45.5 38 13 48.9
32 59 42.2 35 39 4s.6 38 l8 49.0
33 4 42.3 35 43 45.7 38 23 49.r
33 9 42.4 354 8 45.8 38 27 49.2
33 13 42.5 35 53 4s.9 38 32 49.3
33 l8 42.6 '  3s 57 46.0 38 37 49.4
33 23 42.7 36 2 46.1 38 42 49.s
33 27 42.8 36 7 46.2 38 46 49.6
33 32 42.9 36 l l 46.3 38 sl 49.7
33 37 43.0 36 16 46.4 38 56 49.8
334 1 43.1 36 21 46.5 39 0 49.9
33 46 41.2 36 26 46.6 39 s 50.0
33 51 43.3 36 30 46.7 39l 0 50.1
33 55 43.4 36 35 46.8 39 14 50.2
34 0 43.5 36 40 46.9 39 19 50.3
34 5 43.6 36 44 47.0 39 24 s0.4
34 t0 43.7 36 49 47.r 39 28 50.5
3414 43.8 36 54 47.2 39 33 50.6



Chapter 27 283

Kranti Ayann Kranti Ayana Kranti Ayena
+ Bala t Bala + Bala

23" 27', . 23" 27', 23'27',
o ,

39 38 50.7 42 8 53.9 44 38 57.1
39 43 50.8 42 13 s4.0 44 43 57.2
39 4',:, 50 9 42 17 54.1 44 47 57.3
395 2  51 .0 42 22 54.2 44 s2 57.4
3 95 7  5 l . l 42 27 54.3 44 51 S7.s
40 | 5r.2 4231 54.4 45 r 57.6
4 0  6  5 1 . 3 4236 54.5 45 6 51.7
40 l l  51 .4 424 t 5'1.6 45 l  I  57.8
40 15  51 .5 42 4s 54.7 4s 16 57.9
40 20 51.6 42 50 54.8 45 20 58.0
40 25 51.7 42 55 54.9 45 25 58.1
40 29 51.8 43 0 55.0 45 30 58.2
40 34 51.9 43 4 55.1 45 34 58.3
40 39 52.0 43 9 55.2 45 39 58,4
40 43 52.1 43 14 55.3 45 44 58.5
40 48 52'2 43 lE SS.+ 45 48 58.6
40 53 s2.3 432 3 55.5 45 53 58.7
40 58 52.4 432 8 55.6 45 s8 58.8
41 2 52.5 43 32 55.7 46 2 58.9
4t 7 52.6 43 37 55.8 46 7 59.0
4t 12 52.7 934 2 55.9 46 t2 59.1
4r 16 52.8 43 46 56.0 46 16 59.2
41 21 52.9 435 L  ' 56 .1 46 2l' 59.3
41 26 .  53.0 43 s6 56.2 46 26 59.4
41 30 53.1 44 0 56;3 46 3L  59 .5
4t 35 53.2 44 5 56.4 46 35 59.6
4t 40 53.3 44 ro 56.5 46 40 59.7
41 45 53.4 44 r5 56.6 46 45 59.8
4t 49 53.5 4419 56.7 46 49 59.9

4l s4 53.6 44 24 56.8 46 54 60.0
41 59 53.7 44 29 56.9
42 3 53.8 44 33 57.0



284 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

qa*<u{ {tf is,ar<d ilqtq e I
fq*: qrqd tuq arqricawq qil{ u{etl

I8. MOTIONAL STRENGTHFOR SUN AND MOON :
Tbe Sun'sC heshtaB ala( or motionalstrength)w ill correspond
to his AyanaBela. The Moon'sPakshaB ala will itself be her
CheshtaB ala.

Notes : For the Sun and the Moon, ttierc is no scparate
methodo f CheshtaBala computationT. he Sun'sAyanaB alaw ill
itselfbehisCheshtall ala( or motionasl trengthw) hilet heM oon's
PakshaB alni s her CheshtaBala.F or the othcr 5 planets,t he
method is describedin slokas24'25i ntra.

qlqEilrrc{i assr{qqlEgq ir{n I
It+i icaerlgm*d deqFf qtE rrterr

19. DRIG BALA (ASPECTUAL ST'RENGTH):  Reduce
one fourth of the Drishti Pindai f a planeth asm aleficaspectso n
it and add a fourth if it is aspectedb y a benefic. Supera dd the
entirea specto f Mercury and Jupitert o get the net strengtho f a
planet.

3r{r iil(rgTqi g tqqa}rq aq}fqq:r 
irrtFfir faig: eai, fifqilta afr quq rtQoll

20. PLANETARY l4tAR : Shouldt here be a war between
the starry planets( i.e. between2  planetsf rom Mars to Saturn,i n
a givenhoroscope)t,h e differenceb etweenthe Shadbalaso f the
two shouldb e addedt o the victor'sshadbala nd deductedf rom
the Shadbalao f the vanquished.

.[6q{fit fqft'il TFi{I q?airTl {TIII I
qrr q$filq<t ifil qEMIqcaqI qfil: uRttl
qfaarfuq* qltirgqrnqtiaq r
ln) fawrglt: rat( mI rauntieq trlRtl
tilEl q?aqilTffq Ed q?i{t{Tx[ Q t
Tttftcg qra{, EFf tanfrqrRq: nllrl

2t-23 PLANETARY MOTTONS( MARS TO SATURN) :
Eight kinds of motionsa re attributedt o planets.T hesea reV akra



Chapter2 7 285

(retrogression)A, nuvakra( entering the previous sign in retro-
grademotion), Vikala (devoido f Motion or in stationaryp osit-
ion), Manda (somewhast lower motion than usual), Mandatara
(slowert han the previousm entionedm otion), Sama (somewhat
increasingin  motion as againsMt anda),C hara( fastert han Sama)
and Atichara (entering next sign in acceleratedm otion)' The
strengthsa llotted due to such8  motionsa re : 60, 30, 15, 30, 15'
7.5,4 5 and 30.

(.t?ilirf,'liqft'{ |
qg.qrfil6 €5d qfirt?salM Ttd gqtq llqYlt
qFftFil f*fu{iii ilati iserq'.i ftqfa t
Tqrqf<{ilqilqiaarfaredftri a uqfau{ I IR { l I

24-2sM OTIONAL STRENGTHF OR MARS ETC' : Add
togetherthemeanandtruelongitudesofaplanetanddividethe
ori, by to,o. Reducest his sum from the Seeghrocha(o r apogee)
of the planet.' The resultantp roduct will indicatet he cheshta
Kendra(or Seeghrak endra)o f the planetf rom l2 signs'T he Rasi'
degreesa nd minutess o arrivedb e convertedin to degreesm, inutes
etc. and divided by 3 which will denote the motionals trengtho f
the planet. Thus therea re six sourceso fstrengthc alledS thaana
nata OigUata,K aalabala,D rigbala, Cheshta Bala and Naisargika
Bala.

Notes : Take the averageb etweena  planet's mean longi'
tude and true longitude (i. e. Mars to Saturn)' Deduct this
productf rom its seeghrochaw hich will be its cheshta Kendra.
if tni. exceeds 180 degreesd educt again from 360 degrees.
Divide the Cheshta Kendra by 3 which will be the motional
strengtho f the Planet.

${ qtqq clqtqq qnqd qT I
$qqrqgqq;ermrraTuf{ir R.aq\, llRtrll
rrlsofrqTrrgrti-qrqr;enef(g q .qt( I
wiframl w{ grrmutaaql{q <{{ llRell
nlemg.rfurd qfiIftqd qrft5d R€( t
u(!ft awcuq-qrl1iffi  rafaafoal l l R q l l



286 ' Brihat ParqsaraH ora Sastra

iqfiegi irEir sdcr€flfqqcrfiaai r
qfa rnrqi{ rq6e qTrTI?riri  $|rq nRt.tl

26-29 BHAV.4 BALAS .' Thus I explained about the
planetarys trengths. Deductt he 7th house( longitudeo f descen-
dant) from the bhavai f the bhava happenst o be in Virgo,
Gemini,Libra,Aquariuso r the firsthalf of SagittariusIf. Aries,
Taurus,L eo or first half of Capricorn or the secondh alf of
Sagittariuhsa ppent o be the bhavad, eductt he 4th house( Nadir)
from it. Shouldt he Bhavabe in Cancero r in Scorpio deduct
from it the asccndant.And deduct the lOth house( meridian)
from the bhavahappeningt o fall in Capricorn secondh alf or
Pisces. Convertt he product so obtained( in the respectiveca se)
into degreese tc.and divideb y 3 to get the strengthof the bhava.
If the balancein  the processo f deductingt he Nadir, Meridian,
ascendanot r descendanetx ceeds6 signs,deducti t againf rom l2
signsb eforeconvertingi nto degreesand dividing by 3. The
producta fter division should be increasedb y a fourth if the
bhavai n qucstionh asa benefica spect on it. Arid a malefic's
aspectwill entail one fourth reduction. If Jupiter or Mercury
aspecta  bhava,a dd that planet'sa spcctual strcngth also. And
.thens uleradd the strengtha cquiredb y the lord of that Bhava.
This will be the net strengtho f that Bhava.

ctuGrtrlEil$tIEtFxI qqt*E { fttrl I
q;Er((fq{{il€q eat,itc afEi t?qt ll Qo 11

Ri vitqTaq] $rut: Tt?uqF[5sH]Ert:I 
f<fir Soalqqrcq{qE utq qmfqd sq u1ltl

30-31S PECIAL RULES .'The bhavaso ccupiedb y Jupiter
and Mercuri will eachg et an addition of I rupa whild cach of
the bhavaoccupiedb y Saturn,M. ars and the Suns ufferI  rupa
reduction. 15 virupaswill havet o be addedt o the bhavasf all-
ing in SeershodayRaa sisi f birth happensto  be in day time, to
the bhavasf alling in dual (or common)Rasisi f birth happensto 
be in twilight and to the bhavasfa lling in PrishtodayaRasis if
birth be in night.

oirnq*59{TqT{q amiln nqfir?uq:r 
;rEilrFrrgr:( rfTT{rE< nigfimr: $qq illRrl



Chapter2 7 287

Taqr{f{i mirqriq f,il gqfqq} qil: I
eTftrs$ fq?qTRq i{ iqafnn} Gw! rr11rr

32-33.SHADBALA REQU{;:EMENZ,S. ' 390,360, 300,
42C,390,330a nd 300V irupasa ret he ShadbalaP indasn eeded
for the Sune tc. (upto Saturn) to bc considereds trong. If the
strengthe xceedst,h e planeti s deemedt o be very strong.

Notes : The minimum Shadbala requirementso f the
planetsa rea s under'i

. The Sun : 6.5 Rupas
The Moon: 6.0 Rupas

. Mars : 5.0 Rupas
MercurY : 7'0 RuPas
Jupiter : 6.5 Rupas
Venus : 5.5 Rupas
Saturn - 5.0 Rapas

If a planeth as the requireds hadbalai,t  will prove favour-
able to the nativeb y virtue of its strength. However, Saturn's
cxtermes trengthwill give long life as wcll as miseries.

gqd*unqtori g Tds{*r{* faq t r
{snqq: q -q-drf{ rfiq-sTRlgcrnnnil:lY tl
ailwFtir fiqriFq|?T-ftq-*ra-urflsqi r
ftfuafrrqtiiir.?nit dqq: q3<q: q1te1 it1
a?{rferq t,iil q}q-ffErq}: qqqq {qK I
fqqrqq aETs:E ilS.rrffi$aenfrq t rrltrr

34-36. Jupiter, Mercury and the Sun are strong if each of
their SthaanaB ala, Digbala,K aalabalaC, heshtaB alaa nd Ayana
Balaa re respectively1 65,3 5, 50, l12 and 30 Virupas.T he same
requiredf or the Moon and Venusa re 133,5 0, 30, 100 and 4O
For Mars and Saturnt hesea re 96, 30, 40,67 and 20.

Notes : Even if the Shadbala pinda is short of the sums
stipulatedin  the previoust wo slokas,c ertain minimum require-
mentso f the constituents trengthsw ill maket he planet 
ably favourablc.F or this purpose,J upiter,M ercury and"o thoeiid S.ru-n

h



288 Brihat Parasara Hora Sasffa

can be put in 'A' group. The Moon and Venusf orm 'B' group
while Mars and Saturn 'C' group. The constituent Balas in
Virupast hat should be minimumare :

'Type Group'At Group'B' Group. C'

Sthaanabala 165 133 96
Digbala 35 50 30
Kaalabala 50 30 40
Cheshtabala 'll2 

100 67
Ayanabala 30 fi 20

Ayanabala hirs been separatety shown above. It is
normallya  practicet o includeAyana Bala in the Kaalabalait -
self. In that case,Ayanabalas hould be separatelys cen apart
from seeingt he rest of the Kaalabala,a s per the requirements
denotedabove.

qi F'?qr q*rriq ildfrrrftq' sd &q t I
qtl€{raqt: frmtrr} t q}qtm,uietl
tqi qat cq1 mf s qFtser 16rrrrI: 
qln6qt*E lEtl ilfrt{ sqilfilfrru Qen  :

. 37-38. BHAVA EFFECTS ; O Brahmin, thus the various
sourceso f strengthsb e gathered.t ogether and effects declared.
Whatevery ogaso r effectshave been stated with respect to a
bhava will come to passt hrough the strongestp lanet.

qft*q *ffq) {: {rq{rrei ;lil$Fr: I
e{rqfq(t kqq infrwrq* fqtfim: ntc.rl
u6t*A-qqdrrr[trrrnturfrsrtit:
iiq t q?qai qrfr aeq qnzf a drq: ttvott

39.40. ELIGIBILITY TO ISSUE FRUNFAL PREDICT-
IONS .' O Maitreya,t he wordsof one who hasachieveds kill in
mathematics, one who has put in industrious efrorts in the
branch of grammar, one who has knowledgc of justice, one who
is intelligent, one who has knowledgeo f geography, space and
time, one who has conqueredh is senses,o ne who ir skilfully
logical (in estimation)a nd one who is favourable to astrology,
will doubtlessb e truthful.



slQuefiueTgxtllqt R: qt l
C.bepter2 8

Ishta And Kashta Balas
sTs ieaqfrta q qqrult t,qatrlqq I
T{mlq srqtqft ffiqqflnq lttll

l. Now I narrate the benefic and evil tendenciesof thc
planetsb asedo n which the Dasa efrects-good or bod-can bc
decided.

witqti q{ duq: lc.wtfkll qqurqtq I
tql <rfrni\a-<fvrffini5: llRll

2. EXALTATION RlyS .' Deduct t-e planct's debilita'
tion point from its actual position. If the sum excecds6 sings,
deduct from 12 signs. The said sum should then be increased
by I Rasi. The degreese tc. be multiplied by 2 which when
considereda long with Rasisw ill indicate the Uchcha Rasmi of
the planet.

ffiarq ilafi{ eiulSanfrwq t
.n6'cr+rl gqn'tri gtg*i ezn ffi ! ttltt

' flqtnqFft"dsqis qfqlq loqltaqr t
irerH rflF{ a€qfiilsq}gdr rnfqt ttvtt

3-4. CHESHTA RASMI .' Cheshta Rasmis arc to be cal-
culated from CheshtaK endra similar to Uchcha Rasmic omputa-
tions. The Cheshta Keqdras of planets from l\{ars to Saturn
havealreadyb eene xplained. . Add 3 Rasis to SayanaSun (i.o.
Sun with Ayanamsa),w hich will be the ChesbtaKendra fot thc
Sun. The sidereall ongitude of the Sun should be deductcd
from the Moon to get the Moon's Cheshta Kendra. If thc
CheshtaK endra (for any planet) is in excesso f 6 signs;d educt it
from 12 signs. Add I sign and multiply the degreese tc. by 2
which will indicate the CheshtaR asmio f the planet.



290 Brihat Parasora.HoraS astra

ndqtfrqftnd qr<fiu: ss'h{* r
stwr{rt frqa}sennrnq{q wqe lt{tl

5. BENEFICIAL AND MALEEIC RAYS.. Add the
Uchcha Rasmisand CheshtaR asmist ogether and divide by two.
The result will bc auspiciousr ays (Subha Rasmis). Deduct
from 8 the Subha Rasmis to obtain inauspicious rays (or
Asubha Rasmis).

stdcentrq fuq ftFn{eng  affiq 1
mdfqtedd q 6{e ireuftaavrga{u qtl

6. ISHTA AND KASHTA (BENEFIC AND MALEFIC
TENDENCIES) .. Reduce I from each of Cheshta Rasmi and
Uchcha Rasmi. Then multiply the productsb y l0 and add
together. Half of the sum will representt he Ishta phala (benefic
tendency)of the planet. ReduceI shta Phala from 60 to obtain
the planet's Kashta Phala (or malefict endency).

TAd Tefrs}li ir <idirgq{toai r
ffi't {rTri efu-qn dtqi fiqq u\etl
qfiaftsmtlqfr"{|ET!f,cftmtr rrilT:l 
qsrt} al Er q?d q {q+66i 1[ tret r
qk: qffti fuAd ?qrqd It I
mtiq?Eqfg iri f?s ! qws{rq netl

. 7-9. ISHTA KASHTA SAPTAVARGAIA PHALA : 60,
45, 30,2 2,15,t,4,2 and 0 aret he Subhankas( or SubhaG riha
Pankthis or beneficp oints) due to a planet's placement respecti-
vely in exaltation, Moolatrikona, owo sign, extreme friend's
sigo,f riend'ss ign,equal'ssign,e nemy'ss ign, bitter enemy'ss ign
and debilitation sign. If Subhanka is deducted from 60,
Asubhanka (or Asubha Pankthi or inauspicious points) will
cmerge. O Brahmin, in other Vargas,t hesea re halved.

qeqftqGEsFf qrirrE q{ qu8 ilil: rrqq I
,rgri f?T fqiiqfqfil {ncil frfrqa{utorr

10. A planeti s considereda uspiciousin  the first five of the
-rai{p laces.-  In the sixth_placeiti s equal,i .e. neither g- ood nor
bod. And in the other thrce placesi f is inauspicious. 



Chapter 28 291

t{qT{ TEEfiIEcti l€lT il{r ffiqd qia t
ad: md q{ s}ftTlq{ qfqilq.tt ttt ttl
{'islq+ q{ imt{ eaqisfu*t 
qffiqd qqtrrcq ilw qr.r$ci &q I tttttt

II.I2. NATURE OF EFFECTS DAE TO DIGBALA
ETC : The directional strengtho f planet is itself representative
of the effectsd ue to the direction and Dinabala itself is indicat-
ive of efrectsd ue to day. Whatever quantum of Digbala etc. are
obtained by a planet will be the extent of auspicious efrects
acquirableo n account of that strength. Deductingt hose figurcs
from 60, the extent of inauspiciousnesis  known. Ifauspicious-
nesi is more in the caseo f planet's strength, thc Dasa and
Bhavasr elated to that planetw ill be auspicious.' And thcsearc
conversei f inauspiciousnesis predominaot.

qfi: qufq: ttfhtcl qd*i uitq 1lq t
Rir{.rFrsilrfq q.{qflfi qqrri ir ll t I rl
qqq$rsFn$qiq  {?{r{ {roa ,rf it{r| |
{64 il ITTFTFTKIqt srdt il{r6tutvn

13.14. SAPTAVARGAJA BALA AND ISHTA KASHTA
(Continued) .' The various strengths (i.e. the other 6 vargar
vide slokas7 -9 supra) be multiplied by the respective planet's
shadbalap inda which will indicate the auspiciousnesosf  the
vargac oncerned. Auspicious or inauspicious aspectw ill be
obtainedb y multiplying the Subhaor AsubhaP ankthi.S imilarly
auspiciorno r inauspiciouse ffectsw ill be known by multiplying
the auspicious or inauspicious strength by the respectivc
Pankthi.

qr.nni q sA qt{il qiltil q sA s* t
flft qw*rrril fiTficrdiqq{ lrltlt
si{ il€ qfr 1=cur<qi Efi( ?FnI 
flwAfiqqr qa qA $aqi il{'{ irlltqll
zrswngi<rf{nd } sti {fqf{n snq t
q'i qqrqd ilrfiil qn6'cq wei. qt( tllelt



292 Brlhat Parasara Hora Sastra

qtedttrti *{ FrA q r<u}sqqr I
rrfinEqqi EA r*rqFaqt: fxqr rrtsrr
rqrtTfir+n mAi qrqtnrr: sdtfre: r
affiflf q n(fll nflfr Fqrt{qn{trt utetl
dq'laq ?qriiqm aqtcrod sqq l
W ndaqrqni qrf :iri {qls{Eqq uQolp

15-20.E FFECTSO F A BHAYA.' The strengtho f a Bhava
and its lord have already been explained. The actual effects
will bc a combination of bhavas trengtha nd its lord's strength.
If there is a benefic in the bhavaa dd the sarf,et o the auspicious
effectsa nd deduct from inauspiciouse ffects, which will denote
the not auspiciouso r'inauspiciouse ffects. If a malefic is in the
bhava, reverse the process, i.e. add inauspicious effecte and
deduct auspiciouse ffects. Similarly aspectsand etrengths. If a
planet is cxalted or with suc[ a dignity, add auspicious effects
and reducei nauspiciouse ffects. For debilitatlon etc. it is con-
vers€. InAshtakaY4tg,add Bindus (auspiciousp oints) and
'deductK aranas (inauspiciouspoints). If a bhava extendst o two
Rasis,t he rectification will be done as per both the lords. In
that casew hichever Rasi has more Bindus that Rasi will yield
more favourable results concerning that Bhava. If both the
Rasish ave more auspiciousB indus take the average. Thus the
auspiciousa nd inauspiciouseffectso fa bhava be understood.

gtq qEre?rq:t fR Q|. | 
Cbapter 29

Bhava Padas
wFrFqq qGilai darai q q{ fAq ! r
affiqmf il( {fu qrs..q Qfqfq:u ttl
f,rir{ qrlfrri <nil RGecrirq<:r rqq I
rRrRtrqRri (ITil Frftr(Ir ftrlw| 11111



Chapter 29 29'
qiqrqrq w{rdi iqiri qd Gq t I
ttrtr€Fr{ il?r tql rtqq{ frg:t tltt

!

r-3. METHOD oF PADA (w\ CATcULATIONS : O
Brahmin, I shall now tell you about the Padas (or Arudhas)
for bhavasand planets as well, as laid down by the earlier
great sages. The Pada ofthe ascendantw ill correspondt o the
sign arrived at by counting so many signs from the ascendant
lord as he is away from the ascendant. Similarly Padasf or other
nousesb e known through their lords. The word "Pada" exclu-
sively denotest he Padaf or ascendan(t or Lagna Pada).

Notes : Maharshi Jaimini (author of Poon"a Mimamsa)
extensivelyd ealtw ith this systemo f astrologya sg iven in ch. 29-
33 hereof. Though sageP arasarah as originally sown seeds,la ter
on Jaimini delved deepa nd located many pearlso ut of his great
wisdom and intuition. Thus it has become to be known more
by the nameJ aimini astrologyrather than Parasari.

To work out the Padasetc' enunciatedi n these chapters,
we shall considera  nativity as indicated below calling it th.e
standardn ativitY.

Date of birth : May 21, 1944a t 1902 hrs (War time)
79E 20 13 N40

Merc
Ven

Moon

Ascdt
o" 48' ,34

I



29t Brihat PaiosaralI ora Sb*ra

I
Navamsa

t;Merc
I 

Moon
Ven

Inngitrdes

Thc Sun 37 t2 . l
Thc Moon ' 27  8

3s 6
Man 96 18 '46
Mercury 14 54 t3
Jupiter 116  7 ' t 3
Vcnus 27 t7 50
Saturn 639 4l
Bahu ,97 37 6
Ketu 277 37 6



Chapter 29 29s
. In calculatingt he Arudhas for the varioueh ousos, we have

to proceeda s under. First ofall we understandt he 12 Arudhas
thus :

l. l-a.gnaP ada (or simply Pada) Arudha of lst house.
2. Dhana Pada Arudha of 2nd house.
3. Vikrama( Bhratru)P ada Arudha of 3rd house.
4. Matru (Sukha)P ada Arudha of 4th bouec.
5. Mantra or PutraP ada Arudha of 5th house.
6. Roga or Satru Pada Arudha of 6th house:
'1. Dara Pada( KalatraP ada) Arudha of 7th house.
8. MaranaP ada Arudha of 8th house.
9. Pitru Pada Arudha of 9th house.

10. Karma Pada Arudhaof l0th house.
11. Labha Pada Arudha of llth houso.
12. Vyaya Pada Arudbaof l2th house.

In calculating the Arudha pada for a house; note the
number of signsi ts lord moveda way from that particular sign.
Count so many signs from the lord in question. The sign so
arrived will be the Arudha for the sign under consideration.

In the standardn ativity, Scorpio is the ascendanat nd its
lord Mars is 9 signsa way from the ascendanat nd is iri Canccr.



2Xt brihat parasarat iora Sastra

f.n3 w.:c oun!9  signcf rom Cancear ndgetp iscesp. isces
the Arudha ada is  thus

or p o f the ascendan(it. e.Lgna pada).
he Arudha N t ow see

c hart for tle sai-dn ativityo n p. ZlS. (ffre 
nllkqd nguies

in Romann umbersd enote
ada.) th u P ; Bha;af or whitb it sianas
In the seidc hart, for erample, Scorpioh ast he 

h), Mantra-
rudha( 5t v ikramarudh(a3 rd)a ndL abhaiuartrar  rttl. iagiiia-
riuc hasn one.T hus,o nes ignr nayc ontainm oret hano o. er-uanu
whilca nothesr ignm ayn ot bea n Arudhaa t all.

tqFqFi a.ild i{' qt rfagr{fe r
nfur1 Tqeid _qeriq, { nqrq'q qfriq;  lytl
rTNTdr* M ilq q{iq qE r
gtnl q ffi nt friri alr{ rTEti l{tl

+5. S?ECIAL EXCE?TION.S .. The same house or the
7th from it does not becomei ts pada. when the pada fails 
thc in

same house, the l0th therefrom be treateda s its pada.
similarly when the zth trecomesth e pada of a house,, a" 
from the an

originar housei n questionb e treated as its paia.-ir 
ruler *rl

of a bhavab e in the 4th from the bhava, th.o ;i"-;;;;
houseo ccupiedb c noted as the pada.

Notes : In theset wo slokas,e xceptionst o the earlier rules
in calculating Arudhas are outlined. Thesea re :

l. If the lord of a housei s in tbat very house, then 
Pada the

for the timc being farts in that housei tserf. l"',i"i- 
!s per thc exccption, *r1,

we have to count ten srgnst o get the actual
P-ada, For examplc, Sagittariusi s certain Bhava ni"i"g 
thcrein, lrpir*

with the pade having .fallen, in Sagittariri lili:
Insteado f trcating sagittarius as the Arudha, we count l0 
from sagittarius signs

a nd reach virgo. Thus virgo is the paaaili
Jupiter having bcen in Sagittarius.

2. If the lord of b_havais  in its opposite house,t hen for 
tlme being the

t he zth itserf becomesA rubha. Instead 
thEt 7th ,rr"ri"g

housea g pada Arudha, we have to count l0 "si igns 
the said from

zth housew hich wiil indicatet he 4th r-. ,nJlrigi""i
Bhavainquestion as Arudha. For example,A quarius 
ascendanht aving f th;

saturn in the 7th in Leo. couotioj-io'it*;
from Leo, we reach Taurus. Hence Taurus is tne iruOna ?oi
Aquarius ascendanth avrng Saturn in Leo.



Chapter 29 Zg7

" 3. If the lord of a bhava is in the 4th from the bhava, no
countingi s required. The houseo ccupiedb y the lord itself (i.e,
4th from the bhava) is the Arudha. For example, Leo ascen-
dant havingt he Sun is the 4th sign in ScorpiogetsS corpioi tself
as Arudha Lagna.

qrrrqr rEm <rnld aq a<qai GE!r  r
ri{RrTirfr{i (tr{r fu sirEr*i lqtl
frnrGqqR{ fqrid tr{qTqfuI 
fqrtqq qq fry ! ail€nTtrs d a\ rrurr

6-7. PADAS FOR PLANTES : Note the posirion o f a
planeta nd seehow many signsa way is its own sign with refe-
rencet o its position. Count so many sign from the said own
sign and the resultant slgn will become the Arudha of the
planets. lf a planet ownst wo Rasiso r if a Rasii s ownedb y two
planets,c onsidert he strongera nd declaree ffectsa ' ccordingly.

Mtes : Here we are taught of what can be called as
Graharudhao r planet'sA rudha. From a perusaol f the above
verses, we can take it to mean that there are 9 planetary
Arudhas. Sincet he sageu ses" Rasi ownedby two planets" he
obviouslyhints at co-rulershipo f Rahu and Ketu. Rahu is a
co-rulerof Aquariusw hile Ketu shares ownership of Scorpio
(Vide sloka 157, ch. 46 infra).

Assumet hat the Sun is in Capricorn. Counting from Capri-
gorn to Leo we get 8 signs. Again from Leo we count 8 signs
and reach Pisces which is the Arudba for the Sun. The excep-
tions statedf or Bhavarudhasd o not apply to Graharudhas.

In caseof other 5 planets( Mars to Saturn) each owns two
signs. Then the counting of planet's Arudha in such a casei s
with referenceto  the strongeroft he two signs. For deciding
strengthso f signsand planetso ne hast o usehis wise judgement
apart from consultingh intsg iveni n ch. 46. However,w e do not
havea ny authentici nformaticn availablea s to how to useG raha-
rudhas. Either we havet o work on bxperienceo r keeps ilent on
this issue. The literature available on Jaimini system being
limited nothing more can be said about this.



298 Brihat ParssaraE ora Sastra
Brens€q aqfsrpr qcf f6f;q $ Eq t
qilesrE{i ?qrt rfiltslifqfr 11q11
qiT?rq qFra qrqTilqr g<rerFm:r 
qrtruq grr,r\ qilFil: qrrf,lseTqru etl
fqcttq,ji si{ iid re}rafq1frqi, ,
q6qr wai nr* rgur q qaTFrqurl otl
wrcurwlq qrq qqqF<R $tlr ugr:I 
TTFtitl rrlrgail qrTTE fliil ile iqrq:trf ttl

g-t l. PADA AND FINANCE (upros loks 15):  OBrahmin,
I now telr you of somee ffectso f pranetsb asedo n pada. 

p If th;
llth from Lagna ada is occupiedoraspectedb y a planet, the
native will be happy and rich; weatthw ill comet -t.ougt, 
meansi f a beneficis  rcrated as above. A maletic *ilr "iJ.""";r;;.i
wealtht hroughq uestionablem eans. If there be both u"o"n"
and a malefic,i t wiil be.throughb oth means. If the p"r uo"i-ii.
guestion( i.e. the one so relatedt o llth from ragna pada)b e in
exaltationor in own sign etc.,t herew ill be preniyo r gains anJ
plenty of happiness

o tl{l?ilrqT{ qTi{ .qtf q,frqq qrqfil r
qfreir qqT ilil strqft laqsnqt illlt1

12. O excellento f the Brahmins,i f the i2th from lagn
Padai s upaspecteads  the llrh from I agnap ada is U.iog 
cd by a planet,t hent he gainsw ill be uninterrupted. "spiJ

qtr1frwigel ftnM Bq r r
qni* qTfr cerfq cHriffirqrr*r rqlrr
qqrcntil fq [ ! tldrcgvqq$.rit I
lltt Fqlfqilr lol trqqnqtftti iltttvll
silirFrT TilQrrnirFi f{F{nf,irai|lrrr I
seildig iE d* araw riq riqqfrr rt rrr

13-15.O  Brahmin,t he quantumo f gains will correspond
to the number of planetsi n or aspecting the I lth from .Iagna



Chaptcr2 9 299
Pada. If thereisArgalaforthe eaidl lth there will bo more
gainsw hile a beneficArgala will bring still more gains. If the
saidbeneficc ausingArgala be in his exaltation,t he gains will be
etill higher. Ifthe said llth is aspectedb y a beneficf rom the
ascendanlt he 9th etc. gainsw ill increasein  the ascendingo rder.
In all thesec asest,be l2th from Pada be simultaneouslyfr ee
from malefica ssociation.

Notes : From the Arudha ascendant,t he llth house'i s
important in deciding the financialgainst o be enjoyedb y the
native. Sirnultaneousltyh e l2th from Arudha Lagna should be
free from maleficr elationship. If the planetr elatedt o the l lth
from Lagnarudhais  strongert han the one relatedt o l2th from
Lagnarudhae, vent hen there will be gains. lf morea re well
relatedt o the I lth gainsw ill be still n1ore.

For Argala, seec h. 3l infra
. A beneficp lacedi n theascendanta spectingth e I lth from

Arudha Lagnawill be still beneficial. If the aspectis  from the
9th from Lagna,i t will confer much moregains. The llth
Arudha aspcctedb y a favourablep lanetr vill alsoc onfera bundant
gains. In the standardn ativity, Jupiter is in the 9th in exattation
and aspects the I lth housef rom Arudha Lagnaa nd also the
llth Arudha (i e. Labharudha). Hencei n Jupiter'sDasa, the
native can hope for abundantf inancial and professionagl ains.

q(Fqrrlit
\ .qt fqs t qqqngilffiil |

naer6eafwtiti fHakrsiaq aEIn lqtl
qqqA gflfrr FqT'rh nq*qt r
fali fqarqd qnqiri qT*sfq crqil rrt urr

16-17.PADA AND FINANCIAL LOSSES( upto stoka 2I) :
Ifthe l2th from Lagna Padai s aspectedb y conjunctb oth benofics
and malefics,t here will be.abundant earningsb ut plenty of
expenses,T he benefic will cause through fair mcans,. "l"fi"
tlrough unfair meansa nd mixed planets through both fair a.nd
unfair means.

Notes : In the standard nativity, the l2th house from
Arudhapada h aspectedb y Mars (8th aspect).H encct he expenses
are equallyh igh.



300 Brilwt ParasaraE lora Sastra
qnr{s6q EqA {Tsfit'FildnFw{i r
<rcrqqq qq.t qFqliFE16a{rf rdm: u{etl

18. If the 12th from Lagna Padais conjunctthe Sun,
Venusa nd Rahu,t herewill be lossof wealtht hrough the king.
The Moon aspecting(t he saidt rio in the said house) will speci-
fically causem ore suchl osses.

:
qiilsitrl Eqt qlrl qu€aXilfnil r "
ilfarrat eqal fnid qrqqsil{q urrr:u tetl

19. If Mercury is in the l2th from the Lagna Padaa nd be
with or aspectedb y benefic similarly therew ill be expenses
through paternal relatives. A malefic so related to the said
Mercury will causel ossof wealtht hrough-disputes.

qfl{ €qt g{rqd dtfqfil qrqdqi: r
6,qql( eqrr] qrcq:e qsiq feq(qq ! rrlorr

20. O Brahmin,i f Jupiteri s in the l2th from Lagna Pada,
aspectedb y others,t he expensesw il{be through taxes and on
one'sown.

snsalR ur{i R1i urqtor {gt r
q;qqAfEril kq ! qq{qf{ EFtaIrqn:q ttl

21. O Brahmin, if Saturni s in the l2th from the Lagna
Pada along with Mars and is aspecled by others, the expenses
will be through one'sco-born.

aTTcqqa r{{i rqrl t q}rn:nfqatqqrr
ilF{Ft q ilq}fi ilqq}q6TrR{rrilRRtl

' 22. GAINFUL SOURCES. 'IVhateversourcesof expenses
are indicateda bove with referencet o the l2th from Lagna Pada,
gainst hroughsimilar sourceswill occur if thc llth house so
featurcswith referencet o Lagna Pada.

En@rE qqt {TgTqil ifeqa: find t
Sfircqqrg.trt ttt: flrfqil frftilsq tr uRirl



Chapter 29 301

23. THE 7TH HOUSE FROM PADA (upto slaka 27) : lf
Rahu or Ketu is placed in the 7th from Lagna Pada, the native
will be troubled by stomachialdisorders,or by fre.

EInFilE qcirl *9, wr€agtfna: t
. w€it rRdt q $fq$ qieqq:n qvrl

24. Should there be Ketu in the ?th from the Lagna Pada
and be with aspect to or be conjunct another malefic,t he native
will be adventur<iusw, ill have (prematurely)grey hair and big
male organ.

qqrq wf,+ wfi te{rr.-fuisrrt: l
aqqttlsfq f,trftqq wqt w: uR{tl

2"5f. rS hould one, two or all the three of Jupitgr, Venus and
the Moon be in the 7th from [:gna Pada,t he native will be very.
wealthy.

sgq;) qra1 *e: q* arsaqq:q rrq I
aflvq dsfq q+$ qidtffi{d feq t rrlqrr

26. Whether a benefico r a malefici f be exalted in the 7tb
from Iagna Pada, the native wilt be afruent, and be famoug.

t trtrT: qta* qqfi qcna rfqm qqr t
fqr?qrmtq t qlqr Gfinsfq q<rf aq t rrlsrr

2?. O Brahmin, thesey ogasa s narratedby me with refcr-
ence to the 7th fromthe Iagna Pada be also considered from
the 2nd oflagnaPada.

swrql tQtqf qr frql il qr ou*,
qfrt Edt $rqit: fanf ffi ?f6rrr rlrrr

28. Anyone of Mercury, Jupiter and Venus be exalted in
the 2nd from Iagna Pada and be with strength, will pake the
subjectr ich.

. t qlrnq qi wi qqrq qfrfrr qqt I
[t' * trrrr: $R6iisfq firiqr rtqqftrdr:u Rall

T



302 grihat parasaraH ora Sastra

?9. T\y yogass o far statedby me with refc,rencteo  Iagna
Padab e similarlye valuatedfr om Karakamsaa s well.

Notes : Karakamsa is the Navamsa occupied by Atma-
karaka. For more informationa bout Karekamsa,s eec h. -a9
infra. Atmakarakab tc. are discusseidn  ch. 32.

BfT66t{ fqili drA R{e$rfh* qA( |
q{a} qR {T q TrrqnfqqF{tq qrii nQotl
BTrcdrE*' rdtg feu* Er<qi kq t r
flftTnTrrRt ilfq rqfiqgdgt il?tll
D{"tqi{qo ut 1d tri fmqrRqq qAEr 
qGeat aqarqri qrd {rqqise6: li1tl
qt ni(qt qrfq *d T€1 fefiqt r
g{f,i, 'ilrqa, 

da: rrnrtrq'qerEn: lltl
rar{?r<ri *{ H r}si q r{fiq* r
rdf* q*Fi f"t i{ ir dvrar: rlvrr
qni nnr<r{ fqs t ffiqrFEqi Rq* r
fqefqi fqqFflqTeqrqKTqJf qqaq: ui{rl
$;nirqi fqq ! fqq: *aqil qF{ I
frennqltt"sloi ET itqT TrqI udrrq: illirtl
qd qrqqileq uqftrrd faq ! I
Fqrfrdd qqrqt{q ETnrqrqu d atq nlstl

30-37.GENERAL .. If Mercuryi s in the 2nd from Arudha
Lagna,t he nativew ill lord over the whole country. Venusi n
the 2nd from Lagna Pada will make one a poet or a speaker._lffi
the Dara Pada( i.e. the Padaof the 7th house)f alls in anAfrt"
or in a trine countedf rom the LagnaP adaor if the Lagna pada
and DaraP adab oth havesirongp lanets, the native will be rich
and be famou$i n his country. If the Dara Padaf allsi n the 6th/
8th/l2th from the Lagta Pada,t hen the native will be pog1,1fim'-
Iagna Padaand the 7th therefromo r an angle/at rine/an upa'chaya
therefromb e occupiedb y a strongp lanet,t berew ill be happiness
betweent he husbahda nd wife. If the Lagna Padaa nd Dara Pada
are mutuallya ngularo r trinal, therewill be amity betweent he



Chapter 30 303
coupre;i f theseb e in mutually 6th/gth/t2th, doubtlessly mutual
cnmity will crop up. o Brahmin,s imitarry mutuar reiationsuif
or gain or loss through son etq. be known basedo n Lagna pada
and the relative Bhava raq4*fiFtne Lagna pada and Dara pada
are mutuallya ngularo r 3rd and I lth or trinal, the nativew ill be
a king ruling thc earth. si.milard eductionsb e madew ith.refer-
encet o mutual positions of Iagna pada and Dhana pada.

h
qqlqqilsxTlq:u lott

Chapter 30

r Up" Pada
sTrftqqqqrfireq sqqrfr qd faq ! r
$n€tr€ qQqqt grqr<tlEaqf q{utll
Ergwrqrd fqs ! ftrri qirqEqt r
tilqq<tuq €rrrgqrsd og**,,q,,
q+M ilq ilsn Ttorq€ eqaq r
qqrieryt ilRq qnuqgiid ulrr
g"Engci {"1 qrqe faqqrq ! r
tTFTragt eT? qrqi qtq{tfqil rrvrr
sqr€rrl q*wril arcfrisv fl ;r<:I 
gq{q}rrd} ,iq qt risg ER?TrrTn6u,:l 
tFricrr qlq: {qrq edcqfqr€qqfiqil: r

rrFt gq Q rrqrr
I-6. O Brahmin, now I tell you about IJpa pada, tho

auspiciousnesosf  which will confer on then ative happinessfr om
progeny, wife etc. The pada of Lagna (i.e. Arudha tagna)
explainede arlier is (of course)o f prime importance.U pa pada is
calculatedfo r the bhava following the natal ascendant. This
upa Padai s also called Gaunap ada.o  excellento f the Brahmias,



. , $

304 Brihat ParasaraH ora Sasfta

if Upa Padai s conjuncto r aspectedb y a beneficp lanet,o ne wili
obtain full happinessf rom progeny and spouse. Should the
Upa padabe in a malefic's signo r iq aspectedb y or..i s con-

-junct t a malefic, one will becomea n ascetica nd go 
ou with-

a wife. If (in the said circumstances)t here be a "benefic
aspect (on upa pada or the related' malefic), or conjunction'
deprivalo f sfouse will not comet o pass. In this case,t he Sun if
.*ilt.d or ina friendly sign,i s.not a malefic.H e is a malerlci f
in debilitationo r in an enemy'ss ign.

Notes : RegardingU pa pada calculations,t herc are more
thln two views on the same sloka of Parasarao r an idcntical
Sutra from Jaimini. In our text, the word "qgqq" (Anuchara)
is used which denotes" the house following the ascendanat t
birth". some interprett his as the 5th from ascendantw hile I
feel it shouldb e the houses ucceedintgh e natala scendantw, hich
is the l2th trousei n normal sense.

Howevet,w hen we studyo ther commentarieso n Jaimini'
(for examplec haukamba Hindi edition), we are taught that it is
iU. tZrtt housef rom natal ascendanitn  the caseo f an' odd sign
ur".naing and it is the 2nd house from natal ascendanti n the

caseo f io sign ascending' This argument'm eseerhsi' s
"r.o 

mores ound. Accordinglyt he Padaf or the l2th or the 2nd from
L"goo is called Upa pada. In calculating Upa pada' tle rules
mentionedi n verses4  and 5 of the previous chapterb e kept in
mind.

Now take the standardn ativity. The ascendanits  Scorpio'

an evens ign. Its 2nd housei s sagittariusw hosel ord Jupiter is
8 signsa way from Sagittarius. Hence we count 8 signs from
Jup-iter( in Cancer). We so reach Aquarius which is the Upa
pada in this case.

{rrTr6qt {rur*gww'cn Gtftq* t
{qS qq1qt a 5ftti ft sui c€it{ llell
srtsieq Giitd q ;itqt{i ffiqE t

{r qaa 
ETr{ffiqfti silt6} qr{ ttctt
A=qiqi taliqi€A il fi{fteqltq 6ql 1
qqF( rq.A qrtl cqe|qqlRgtI :  uQt l



Chapter 30 305

stTfs6' Efln ?n fqqi iRqil sfrrt 
ir? qRn* fqlr  !  .g."g" qiq tttott
sqrsi GaEsffq €rarfqqtigil t
eqqiil atml qilffqq qr grrfr rrlf( nttll
q([r q.qfr dqrlslsdri q ;nl GerqtTq!  t
sarrqfq ffir} qritq q rinq:n tRtl

7.12. EFFECT OF 2ND FROM UPA PADA .. If thc 2Nd
from Upa pada is a beneficsign or is aspectedb y or conjunctw ith
a benefic,t he sameg ood results( as for wife and sons)w ill comc
to pass. If there be a planet in the 2nd from Upa pada in
debilitation sign/Amsaor be conjunct with a debilitatedlmalefic
planet, there will be destructionof wife. If the said occtrpant
be in exaltationsign/Navamsao r be aspectedb y another planct,
therewill be many charmingand virtuouswives. O Brahmin,i f
Gemini happenst o be the 2nd from Upa pada, then also thcre
will be many wives. O excellint of the Brahmins, if the Upa-
rudha or the 2nd therefrom be occupiedb y its own lord or
if the saidl ord is in his other own house,t he deatho f wife will
be at an advanceda ge.

Notes : In the examplec ase,t he Upa pada is in Aquarius,
a malefic'ssign and is powprfully aspectedb y malefic Mars and
is without benefic'sa spect. However, thc 2nd from Upa pada is
well fortified as its lord Jupiter is exalted and aspects the said
2nd house. Hence the native is happily married and endowed
with progenich appiness.

Loss of wife is to be expcctedi f thc 2nd from Upa pada is
occupiedb y a debilitated planet, or the occupanto f the aaid 2nd
is in debilitation Navamsa,or is conjunct a debilitatedp lanet (i.e.
a baneficdebilitatedj oining a malefici n the 2ird from Upa pada)
or a beneficj oining a malefici n said 2nd house.

Taurus becomingt he Upa pada is said to givc many wives
or plurality of marriage.

Although there may be combinations for early loss of
spousei f the 2nd lord from Uparudha( or Upapada)i s in the 2nd
itself or is in his other sign, it.will considerablyp rot€ott he native
from such a calamity. And the spousea s a resultw ill live udto
an advanceda ge.



306 Brihat ParasaraH ora Sastra

Tq<nft ilrqilstd fi?qrtn iilTrr<+ l
swqfq fqqttl qq&?r q i$q: ullrl
vtTtsaqfrf:( ffi fiqc'etrrrdsq il |
gTaq Qr(FTNqTq: r;rftqri il fdq{qrE| |tvil
sqTse GrdA qI rSnwau* Gq t r
ltRTRtgr{it qrqt rtezft sqgqrTf]qf,Tltltll

13-15. WIFE FROM THE 2ND OF UPAPADA (upto
sloka2 2) .' [f a planetb eingc onstanti ndicatoro f wife (i.e. 7th
lord or Venus)i s in own house,t herewill be lossof wife only at
a latcr stage. If the lord of Upaoadaor the constants ignifica-
tor of wife is in exaltation,t he wife will be from a noble family;
reversew ill be the case,i f he is debilitated. O Brahmin, if the
2nd from Upapadai s relatedt o a benefic,t he wife will be beauti'
fut, fortunate and virtuous.

sqIGUq fuflt q nfrtrp feqa] qfE t
3rwrntqR"q€6qTqqTl{ i{l r qne faq ! tttqtt

16 ShouldS aturna nd Rahu be in the 2nd from Upa pada,
the nativew ill loseh is wife on account of calumny or through
death.

sqr6e Gft fl fnfeqtl qqr fiqilJ t
<{ilqETtqrdt qTqA irrl {rfrdt lltell

17. The native'sw ife will bet roubledb y disordero f blood,
leucorrhoea(r <<) etc. if Venus and Ketu are in the 2nd from
Upapada.

tq+E frqnl 61 6q1sR{anitilr t
t{tfl: nft <r6tkreisfeqvq{dgiil ||  | e| | 

18.M ercuryw ith Ketu in the 2nd from Upapadaw ill cause
breakageo f bonesw hile Rahu,S aturn and tbe Sun will cause
distresso f bones.

TTqrSt twrflqi il?rrr$qt laqtf,q ! t
tqqif 3,wtT *nftnr<hdXat ttq e tt



Chapter3 o 307

g'weiis.i<ta qrcf iil'd laqlwq ! r
1qefannl it? mqiiewrfient nRotl
xapqfqq] faq ! tqqtfr ftqa] qn r
qet rqqtg-?*ca} qrqt a;mawFqallrR tlt

m(e|? lg;afawrfiqil t
qq.dt-ral ilil qri iitf fqqRqml llRll

19-22. Mercury and Rahu in the 2nd from llpapada
will give a stout-bodiedw ife. If the 2nd from Upapada
happensto  be a sign of Mercuryand is tenanted by Mars and
Saturn,t he wife of the native will suffer from nasald isorders.
Similarlya  signof Mars becomingt he 2nd from Upapada and
occupiedb y Mars and Saturnw ill causen asald isorderst o one's
wife. Jupitera nd Saturnw ill, if be in thO2nd from Upapada'
caused isorderso f ears/eyetso the wife. If Mercury and Mars
be in the 2nd from Upapadao ther than own signso r if Rahu is
with Jupiter in the 2nd from TJpapadat,h e native'sw ife will
sufferf rom dentald isorders. Saturn and Rahu together in a
sign of Saturnw hich is the 2nd from Upapadaw ill causel amen-
esso r windyd isorderst o the native'sw ife. These evilsw ill not
comet o passi lthere be conjunction or aspect from a benefic
(or from anotherb enefici n the caseo faffliction being causedb y
a benefich imself).

wnlqq<Eqr€6T< ql qrfvr:qcdrtlG q ! t
a€qlaa ieqTfqqt:c q eavrcq faqlaq! llllll
qqtq 16F[ iafria6nf({Rq: I

23-23t. O Brahmin,all theseeffectsb e deducedfr om the natal
ascendant,L agna Pada, the 7th from Upapadaa nd the lords
thereof. So sayN aradaand others.

s€vql aq* fqq ! nRwr€er qfEu lvtl
Erg"dr dcrrsdsqqrdfr{6gatar 
qriuk{arae fq*: gr} fqqrqa:nR{tr
tatva<rgalit gel {trixarnaq|  '
nqosfqq{t fqq ! ftgfo*tirT{fi: llRqll

t



308 Brihat Porasara Hora Sastra

srilt<fi gulfuqi ga$qt rwqt t
K g"Xal ilfq qqli\tfll q*q rrlsrr
il{T{ firqt <nfr aggagal ;r<:I 
€.tdtTlt1et: g} 11nJ ilrqi f6war I rrRctt

25-28.A BOUT SONS .' If Saturn,t he Moon and Mercury
are togetheri n the 9th from one of the said places( sloka2 3),
there will be no sona t all s'hile the Sun, Jupiter and Rahu so
placedw ill givea  numberof sons. The .Moon so placed will
qive a son while a mixtureo f planetsw ill delayt he obtainmento f
i son.T he son causedb y the conjunctionof the Sun,J upitera nd
Rahu above will be stroDg, valorous, greatly successfula nd
will destroye nemies. If Marsand Saturn are in the said 9th,
therew ill be no son, or a sonwill be obtained by adoption or
brother'ss on will come in adoption. In all these cases,o dd
signsw ill yield many sonsw hile evensign will causeo nly a few.

f r t  f f i fqc! frrnaruqtftil r
!flE{rrilsq [enqt qta: renril q?Er rlerr
qilf,FrFrtrfliq ftcr€;dfdt,'Rffd r
q.f fa{iwsqscqrqfq q}ri f{f*nnE u! ot l

29-30,M ANY SON.SA ND MANY DAUGHTER,S. ' O
Brahmin, if Leo happenst o be Upapadaand is aspectedby the
Moon, there will be a limited numberof children. Similarly
Virgo will causem any daughters.

rrf{<r( f"qlr€ql q<q utgfr<mlil t
iT? qfq66ra Eiik+ llllll

31. CO-BORN FROM,I$GNA PADA (upto sloka36) :
Rahu and Saturn in tn6fd/t f tn}<in-mg6-a pada will destroy
the co-born of the native-in the llth elder brothers/slstersa nd
in the 3rd younger ones.

vI
\r iM re rds il{il anf6rl q I
o
J - qA qrfq qt r?i ,iunniqtfa*r rlRrr



Chapter 3O 309

32.I f Venusi s in the 3rd/llth from Lapa Pada,t herew ould
haveb eena n abortion to the motber earlier. Samei s the effect
if Venusi s in the 8th from natal ascendanto, r from Lagnarudha'

dtq mafrtwgfrf<rit gitr<<t: ! t
Etrnernfrfal t a;iequeg'en:l lllll
qe* sna(€T€t EIFIEIRr: srafqt: I
naandgfr loe qflitreli Gq t lllYll
sft66d6adit{fr fEqiq} frcqirq ! t
nft<t} qar fil ! qrrnl aI Qdt<rrl:ll ttt
ilaI rqqT"tq: Frr{?i ilqr€ de<r: I s,
Cdtt errri ffi aEti qtHt{q{ lllqll P

33-36.T hesea re the'effectsO,  Brahmin,a s statedb y vener'
ables agesfo r the 3rd and the I lth from Lagna Pada' Should
the Min, Jupiter,M ercury and Mars be in the 3rd/l lth from
the LagnaP ada,t here will be manyvalorousc o-born' Should
SaturriandM ars be in the 3rdi llth from lagna Pada or lend
aspectsth ereto,y oungerand elderc oborn will respectivelyb e
destroyedI.f  Saturni s alonei n one of the saidh ousesth e native
will bi sparedw hilet he co-bornw ill die. Ketu in the 3rd/l lth
wilt giveabundantb appinesfsr om one'ss isters.\ 

qtq6rE q66rilqFQq tqRa uwqfqil t
qk} qEk 

{q€rq??I{ftt anR€6i:ll sll

37. OTHER MATTERS FROM LAGNA PADA (upto
sloka 43) .' If the 6th from Lagna Pada is occupiedb y a malefrc
and is bereft of conjunction/aspecot fa benefic,t he native will
be a thief.

\f

€ql arEi Turi qQ+qdfdn t
\

ilFrqi{ir rr}q <re} qdqrtqgfr Gq ! ttlqtt
. 38. If Rahu is in the Tthllztb from LagnaP ada or aspect

one of the saidh ousest,h e nativew ill be endowedw ith spiritual
knowledgea nd be verYf ortunate.



310 Brihat ParasaraHora Sastra
qRd iffi ffi miffiqql u\ r
siireae iN, rfrqFA ir qrii rrierr

:/ 39. If Mercury is in Lagna Pada,t he native will lord over
whole country while Jupiter will make him a knower of all
things Venusi n this contextdenotesa  poet/speaker.

Note : Also seeverse3 0, ch.29.

vy s!rG6r( qqq qre q;Fi qmiai I
v <iaaqilh* dtqFqrqt Gqqaq nvorl

40. O excellento f the B'ahmins,i f benelicso ccupyt he 2nd
t/ 

' from the Upapadao r from LagnaPada,t he nativew ill be endo-
wed with all kinds of wealtha nd be intelligent.

r'qrGati{qiru'hi Gffiq*t
qrq+q(itli qkl mfr faRmquYttl

41. Onewil l  surelybecomeathiefi f  thelordof the 2nd
from Upapadai s in the 2nd house (from thc natal ascendant),
and be with a malefic planet.

x;st-6s6@ (rEI tr{rrt faq t I
rieFrn1 qrqi iltt: Tf,auEIq+g{iqi uv1tl
nilqi i6$q: FrtR(rd*flI{ Htqi r
fq{q{qflt{t u,Ff fq'}i qilf{iq uvirl

42-43.O Brahmin,i f Rahu is in the 2nd from the lord of
7th countedf rom Upapada,t he native will have long and pro-
jectedt ceth. Ketu so placedw ill causes tammeringa, nd Saturn
oo placedw ill make one look ugly. Mixed will be the effectsif 
thcre are mired planets.

TANT CLASSICS(Tex t  . | I l t h  Eng l l sh  T rans la t l on )

AVALI  Q Volunnes set )  -Kalyanavarma
KET NIDttI - B,ama Dayalu

fo r  De ta l l ed  11s t  :RANIAN PUBL ICAT IONS
!6 ,  Ansa r l  Road, Da tya  GenJ
NE! \l DELIII-1 10ooa (LNpLaI



sTsrrs{fltsrTT|E | 1l: I  ll
Ctrapter3 l

"Argala Or Planetary Intervention
qqql I qrsriar q}mr qrat qqilTseril |
arr{ ar}gfwarfr qqmqsqi 3t t rrqtt

l. O illustriouss age,y ou have told of (some)a uspicious
effectsr elated to Argala. Kindly narrate its conditions and
effects.

niq ! sr{qr ?rrqq qT qlsqii Taq I
frqr daqci q rqlE qlsqalf isrleq ql llRll
qg{ q q+ eni tl aqr aqfett
iqEtuttl: sqIE <in aqlqf(cr6Edtqrrt:t ltt

. fqdm rwtTiaql qI ETtltr qil €srrifi: l
qdri arfumr: qFIIqa iiq ! qtumt:l lYll
ailfq qniet iqr f{q+dr Gq}<q ! r
d-nfq daqlqTni $qqrifaif fag: ttttt
q=qri qr,tar€qd md aGrlsFE I
arlquar qI q 64iqqlE f,Fril Gu ! ttqtt
g6qEI qflaat w Gqr qsqqT F{aTI 
Bi{qt aqfem}tq;qr Sfaft: t'ftra}aqt tt\stt

' '
<rfqral rQilerlrlq fHqr Gfqqrstiqr | 
frqtum ![sF[aI fmm q €<Iurrl llcll

' qa qnl Rqa: <ieeacq qr6r;at qqt t
qR qd id fqfq{id faqtdq !ttQtt

1Rq 
2-9t.F ORMATION OF ARGALA.' Maitreya, I explain

below Argala to know definite effects of houses and planets.
planets iithe 4th, 2nd and the l lth (from a houseo r a planet)



3t2 Erihat Parasara Eora Sastrd
causeArgala while obstructorso f the Argala will be those in the
lOth, l2th and 3rd. If the Argalac ausingp laneti s strongert han
the obetructingo ne, the former will prevail. .Or if the number
of Argalasa re more than the obstructingp lanets,t hen also the
Argala will prevail. If therc are3 or more maleficsin  the 3rd,
they will cause vipareeta Argala( more effectivei ntervention)
which will alsob e harmlessa nd be very favourabre. The 5th is
also an Argala place whiret he praneti n the 9th wifl counteract
cuchA rgala.A s the nodesh aver etrogradem otions, the Argalas
and obstructionsb e also counted accordingly in a ,"i"r*
manner.S ages ayt hat the Argalac ausedb y onep lanetw ill yield
limited effectsb, y two medium and more than two excellent
effccts. Argalass hould be countedf rom a sign or a planet as the
casem ay be. The Argata unobstructedw ilr be fruitiul while the
one duly obstructedw ill go astray. The Argala effectsw ill be
derivedi n the Dasap eriodso f the Rasi or planctc oncerned.

- Notes : 'Argala' in Sanskriti s figuratively usedt o denote
an impediment or obstruction. Arga:a is calculatcdf rom a
houseo r from a planet. The 4th, 2nda nd I lth houseo ccupants
causeA rgalaf or a bhava or a planet. A planet in the lOth
(from w-hereth e Argara is carcurated)w iil obstruct the erguio
comingf rom the4th. simitarr.va  praneti n r2rh wilr counteiaci
Argala emanatingfr om the 2nd while the one in r rth wilr impeJe
lhe Argalaf rom the 

' 3rd. Somes uggcsth at the Argarao ustiuct-
ion placcsa re countabref rom the Argara ptaces inircaa of i;;
the origionalplaceo r ptanet. This is not logical gf"o."
into Gocharav edha (or obstructionsd uring trans"intsO)w "  ili con-
firm our findings.

Just as wc mark thc Gosnara Vedhas along with benefic
phbes, let us havet he Argara and their obstructionsa s under :

. 4 2 t t 5
. m-Tt'-T .t

Now geea  hypotheticalg enitureg iven on the next pagef or
an easygraspo f the Argala scheme.

The ascendanii n the hypotheticalc hart is Aries. Mars
in the 4th, Sun and Mercury in thc 2nd, and Jupit-eri " tfrc
llth causeA rgala for the ascendant. (An 

' Argala bybencfic goes
under the name subhargala' 

and is deemeAf avouraUte. nui 
will we

confine ourselvest o the crtent of Argala in simple ,rnr.l.



Chapter3l 313

The Argala of 4th houseM ar$js counteredb y lOth houseS aturn,
that of Sun-Mercuryi n the 2nd by Venusi n the l2th and that of
Jupiterjn the I lth by Moon-Rahui n the 3rd.

As far as the nodesare concerDedth ese are calculated in a
a reversemanner. From Rahu, the 2nd horrsec ounted in
reverse order contains Sun-Mercury causing Argala to Rahu
which is, however,obstructcdb y Mars in the l2th from Rahu
(counted in reverse manner), similarly in all cases these be
properlyu nderstood.

By way of additional information, seeG ocharav cdha and
beneficp lacesf or examplef or the Sun which will prove that our
interpretation of Argala obstructedi s correct :

IF6-l 0rti-l ?--T
In the above figures, thc upper ones denotet he Sun's

favourablet ransitsf rom the Moon and the lower ones denote
obstructivef orcesi n suchh ousesf rom the liloon. For example
the Sun in the 3rd housef rom the Mbon during transit will be
favourable. But his favourabled ispositionw ilt remain curbed
if simultaneousltyhe 9th from the Moon is transitedb y another
planet( than of courseSaturn,w hich is an exception).A gain just



314 Brihat Parasara Hora Sanil

as there is Vipareetargala( or Argala itself eliminated), there is
also Vipareeta Vedha. Vipareeta Vedha will provea uspicious
eliminatingt he Vedhao r obstructionS. upposeth e benefice ffects
of the Sun in the 3rd from the Moon are being obstructedb y
anotheri n the 9th from the Moon. The momenta notherp lanct
joins the Sun in the 3rd from the Moon, the Vedhai n the 9th
from the Moon is off and the Suni n the 3rd proves auipicious
till he hasa  comPanion.

In the matter of Argala aird its obstruction, also seet he
followingv erse.

s{rifli qfils;eps tr{rqifgrirg*iq}:.r
fpau.rr.rlqq fqq] fqq! fqrffifEla * wq u ! otl

1^ SPECIAL : The Argala causedb y placemento f a
planeti n the first one fourth part of thc Rasi is countered by
anotherp laccdi n the 4th quartcr of the respectiveo bstructive
Rasi. Simllarly2 nd quarter'sArgalai s eliminatedb y the 3rd
quarterP lacemcnt.

Notes : We havc learntt hat an Argala, for examplein  the
4th from a bhavao r a planeti s eliminatedb y anothelp lacedi n
the lOth housef rom the original planet/houseH. ere,t he rulesf or
obstruction of Argala are still narrowed down. Accordin$ly,
there are only two circumstanceosf  Argala getting nullified.
Make the sign in which the Argalao ccursi nto four quarters.( of
?" 30' each). Similarlyt he signw hereo bstructiono ccursis also
madei n four quarters. If the Argalacausingp laneti s in the first
guarter( or first 7" 30' of the sign)w hile the obstructingp laneti s
in the 4th quarter( i.e.22" 30'-30"), the obstructioni ndeedw ill
come to pass. Otherwisen ot. So to say Argala will operate
snd the obstructionw ill fail. Likewisew hile the Argala planet
is in tbe 2nd quartero f the sign( i.e. 7' 30'-15'), the obstruction
(planeti a 15"-22" 30' i.e. 3rd quarter)w ill combatt he Argala'

qt ilfi ql qrp frqlq{wi|iil rrrnI 
riil qn'tsfafqqnl Egfircrrt] g*( tt tt tt
rr€r trrQ: qql qrRq Bfcae8gqw ft t
tr r"ifqlii al{ rtqFqrrilqsoq* tttRtt



Chapter 31. 315

srf* it qi f{q I qtenqqrlfiqd: I
Eiln qlEqr-Ail qqgEifq dlfsfq: tl t l ll
qgc qr{* \  l C

{{tr{r-$trSetta: I
5qt gefiarladqa] {faurar: utvrl
qad fiqqd, firn urEr(g(d sg I
ersa* qut q,ce qq qrrqlEqq] iE rrt{rr
Ecri <tqqrql{ FIT$t FnqqqFqd: I
wrrit q eqi fqr ! aqqrfuqdc -orrq*n ltrll
qnnqniCIrnt g qkd Egfq,i 'udq r
qed qrqr{.Tui q. lqarrqTqfqa]nq u t\etl

ll-17. ARGALA EFFECTS. ' Shouldt hereb e Argala for
ihe Arudha Pada,f or the natala scendanta, nd for the 7th from
both, the nativew ill be famousand fortunate. A malefic or a
beneficc ausingu nobstructedA rgalaa spectingth e ascendantwill
makeo ne famous. Similarly aspecto n the 2nd house denotes
acquisitiono f wealtha nd grains,3 rd house-happinessfr om co-
born; the 4th house-residences,q uadrupedsa nd relatives; the
5th house-sons,g rand sonsand intelligeice,t he 6th house-fear
from enemies; the 7th house-abundant wealth and marital
happinesst,h e 8th house-difficulties, the 9th house-fortunes;
the l0th house-royal honour;t he llth house-gainsa, nd the
12th house-expenses. The Argala by beneficswilgl ive various
kinds of happiness,w hile benefic effectsw ill be meddlingw ith
maleficA rgalas. Argala by both beneficsa nd maleficsw ill yield
mixedr esults.

Notes : For our own benefitwe should understandt he
word 'Argala' in a suitablem annerapart from the manner the
Argala functionsv is-a-visA rgala elimination.

l. Argala can be causedb y a beneficwhich is known as
Subhargala. This Argala can be from a malefic also, so that
the'beneficc ausingA rgala stallst he maleficr ole going against
the native. If the benefic'sA rgala is obstructedby another,
ihen the beneficw ill becomei neffectivei n Argala and the first-
nentioned malefic will operatef reely.

2. Atgala can be by a malefic with referenceto  a benefic
so that the native doesn ot enjoy good effectsd ue to the benefc.



316 Brihat Parasara Hora Sasta

This is Papargad( or malefic Argala) If the Argata is eliminated
by a benefico r a nralefic,t hen again the first mentioned bene-
fic will be at liberty to act accordingto his own disposition.

3. Argala is operablewith referenceto  Bhavas( or houses)
as well.

Othcr relativer ulesn eedbe well understoodb eforeappli-
cation of the Argala.

qiiqsEq$mq{t\ - enitg Haq !r
afril{ir qlqt qrqr TTTfqEfff i l r  inq:  l r {ct l

18. Shouldt hcre be (unobstructedA) rgala for the ascen-
dant, the 5th and 9th the nativew ill doubtlesslyb ecomea  king
and fortunate.

sretE fi't(fitsqt4i:l 1Rt l
Chapter32

Planetary Karakatwas
(Indications)

i[efisd {E5r.rk*rttfqr trtTiqrRt,r{r6l{ |
qcmqf{{Fraq (rafiq qTs6ed<qfi1i l t tl
rrirt:q qlr?r(al f Rqr€;arl fHE aErr 
q*{ sran+{ tfqqGel nqnt u1ll

l-2. I now detail belowAtmakarka etc. obtainablef rom
amongt he 7 planetsv rzt he Sunt o Saturn. Somes ayt hat Rahu
will becomea  Karka whent here is a stateof similarityi n terms
of longitudeb etween( two) planets. Yet some say that the 8
planetsi ncludingR ahu will havet o be consideredir respectiveo f
luch a state.

snirTHTq tfEder{iq al q'{Irfufrl [E: I
sinqrrl nqftrr{r( drgrct fqfiqrfirfi: rrlrr



Chapter 32 3r7

{ri <tPqroqrfusqrq{ IQft tqtqmrcs: t
i{Tn fuq: fiTc6: FlrqilIqr{r}s?tEtfiIt6: tlvll
qeqinl rleq(ie: uqwia: u gE Q t

' fqq'tqqqilaqlwn: qiteat: <afra: ttttt

. r*ntqrEulsu:*qnq{Rrtt: 6l<tn"t qfa t
'wqt 

qrrqt<q6rqt*q sqd f6e lttqtt
€ qq qtarrftn] fqiiq'f faqqf,q tt

. qeil qql cfGlsRa crrqi fqiRqrqr: tt\ett
$iqrdtft1qrfr ir a;ffi}utq ilqI llcll

3-8. ATMA KARAKA DEFINED Among the planets-
"

from the Sun etc. whicheverh ast raversed m aximum numbero f
degreesin  a particulars igni s calledA tmakarka' If the degrees
arJidentical,t hen the onewith more minuteso f arc and if the
minutesare also identicalt hen the one with higher secondso f
arcwillhave to be considered'I n thatcase' these three are
calledAnthyakaraka,M adhyakarkaa nd Upakheta'I n the caseo f
Rahu,d educth is longitudei n that particulars ignf rom 30' The

Karakas will have to be decided as above and as per further
rulesg ivenb elow. Out of these Karakas' Atmakaraka is the

mostimportant and hasa  primesay on the native just 
 as the

king is tL. rrrortf amo,rsu *oog the men of his countrya nd is the

heai of all affairs and is entitlid to arrest and releasem dn'

qql rrcnirqr fqtr ! gzrwrenEqql il: I
weqt eltmrig afurtft tnl(fiI: ltell
3{Rqrgtqt{r? qqff, tEFRtqtF: I

qfilmi rIqI qt q{sft?qr<q} laq-! tttott

rln sE rgururi a sqqt qqfit fq I
aqTss?qs'R* (

Ti 'TIs€a q{qqlqft: llt lll
qgqt lt qaq qeicsrqwlrcq] Gq I t
ilqri Sie eielrrt €Errqrcramll:t lll

g'12. IMPORTANCE OF ATMAKARAKA O Brahmin'
" 

just as the minister cannot go against the king' the other

Li"t*, rrz, Putrakaraka, Amalyakarka etc' cannot predominate



318 Brihat Parasaral lora Sastra

overAtmakarakain the affairso f thc nativc. If the Atmakarka
is adverseo, ther karakasc annotg ivc their bcnclic effects(f ully).
Similarly if Atmakaraka is favourable,other karakasc annot
prcdominatew ith their maleficinfluences.

3TTiITITI{S'fli$fr ?qil{JsrTliqsRfi: I
il(cFqii{rs} sll?tt d*qn}TrTqrifl.6t:r I Qtl
il??q?ltqt: fqara*qtErqicr: 5TE6rtfi: I
grl;;(qiqrs] infaatfr;riqinql A q: u lytl
( ErffiRfi) irft fqfq{to faq}eq ! r
q{rcrrfil(efi qt arEronsfqm: g{Tu t{tl
{T{lfrtr}qt5:} qef;il giTt['l{r'u 1
al rel $rFrgcqt)q riai qpq w.qfqutqtl
il{nnrqr(i?i qJq} *q} Gqtrq ! r
ftqr6Tq{'q{rnr€rrs Fi iiri {r$rTs{q\u tstl

13-17.OTHER KARAKAS .' The planet next to Atma-
karakai n termgof longitudc is calledA matyakaraka.S imilarly
follow.onea nother in terms of longitudea re Bhratru Karaka,
Matru karaka, Prtrukaraka, Putrakaraka,Gnati karaka and
StreekarakaT. hesca re charakarakaso r inconstants ignificators.
Somec onsiderMatrukarakaand Putrakarakaa s idcntical. If
two planctsh ave the samel ongitude,b oth becomct he same
karakai n which case there will be a deficit of otre karaka. [n
that circuntstancec,onsiderc onst ant significator in thc context
of benelic/malefiicn flucncef or thc concernedr elative.

Notes : A total of eight Chara karakas (inconstanto r
variables iguificatorsa) re suggesteads  under :
' l. Atma Karaka (highesti n longitudedevoidof Rasis)

2. Amatya Karaka (nextt o Atma Karaka in longitude)
3. Bhratru Karaka (nextt o AmatyaK araka in longitude)
4. Matru Karaka (nextt o BhratruK araka in longitudc)
5: Pitru Karaka (next to Matru Karaka in longitude)
6. Putra Karaka (next to Pitru Karaka in longitude)
7. Gnati Karaka (next to Pitru Karaka in longitude)
8. StreeK araka( next to Gnati Karaka in longitude)



Chapter'32' 39
The sagealsos uggestas schoolo f thought.whichc onsiders

only seven significators,t reating Matru Karaka and putra
Karakaa s identical. This sectiont hus countso nty ? Karakas.

Sinces omeadvocateth e use of g karakas, Rahu is also
addedt o the sevenp lanetsf rom Sun to Saturn. The degrees
traversedb y Rahu shouldb e countedf rom the end of the Rasi
he is in. In the standardn ativity (ch.'29)t rref oilowing are the
kara\a planets. We take 8 Karkas into consideration.

Karaka Planet Longitude

Atmakaraka The Moon 27'35',46"
Amatyakaraka Venus 27 t7 50
Bhratru Karaka Jupiter 26  713
Matru Karaka Rahu 22 22 54
Pitru Karaka Mercury t4  54 13
Putra Karaka The Sun 71218
Gnati Karaka Mars 6  18. 46
Dara Karaka' Saturn 3  941

If two planets have the samel ongitude identicalt o the
secondo f arc, both of them will be qualifiedf or that particular
karakaatwao r significatorship. In that case, there will be
shortageo f planetf or Dara Karakatwa. The constanti ndicator
Venusshouldt hen bc consideredin  the matter of marriage etc.
is comingunder Dara Karaka.

EftI;Tr( trsEqqrfq Rer<reaq {'I{fiq-{q I
Tr f\+rml ** ql qcil qfq-{na}:u letl
q?ar<ql*dt +* TrTafiI{m' sErrt I
qlq* qfq{t qqrq: 6'*{Tn qqdtrqfqn ta.tl
irurqqqwdtfi qrgqErnrq Er?aqTI: 
g<l: &emg:{ {lE tfr:, gq;w ivanqu iotl
fqqr€qrfqr: qrt't fqarl {q{rr} dqr l
qrilrqEr{qftq;?zn q+ q Rqqrnw ilRltl



320 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

l8-21. CONSTANTSIGNIFICATOR,S.'  I narratebelow
the constants ignificatorsa s relatedt o the planets. The stronger
&mongt he Sun 4nd Venusindicafesthe father while the stronger
amongt he Moon a;ndMars gdicatest he'mother. Mars denotes
sister,b rother-in-law,y oungerb rother and mother. Mercury
rulesm aternalr elative while Jupiter indicates paternal grand-
father. Husbanda nd sons are respectivclyd enoted by Venus
and Saturn. From Ketu note wife, father, mother, parents-in-
law and maternalg rand father. Thesea re conslants ignificators.

Notes : The above planetarys ignificancec an be tabulated
8SUnder: 

Planet Korakatwa

Sun/Venus Strongero f the two indicatesf ather,
Moon/Mars Strongero f the two indicatesm other.
Mars Sister, brother-in-law, younger brother

and mother.
Mercury Matcrnal relatives
Jupitcr Paternalg rand-father
Venus Husband
Saturn Sons
Ketu Wife, father, mother, parents-in-law,

maternalg randf ather.

The abovem ay be linked with theviewse xpresseidn  verses
occurringi n the rest of this chapter.

srqrQ 6.rrfiI{ Eel daqtTsmqfeq!  t
<fra: goq* ilRt{qqrqlil qg{* llRRll

5qr( Edhrd flirr lqtq qui q TrrgelI: 
tis<rq qFqq g"J Er<Tq:q r€  q'd ttRlrt
I'?{r{6eq* !et: fqTraRi &ffiq t
tR tr{ fqqrfiq tarafiE qdi a\ ttlvtt

22-24. HOaSES RELATED.' Thesec onstants ignificances
are derivablef rom the Bhavasc ounted from the said constant



Chapter 32
321

significators.T he 9th from the Sun denotesf ather,
the Moon t he 

mother, 4th from
the 3r. from Mars brothers,t he 6;il- 

Mercury maternar i-;;;
u ncle,t he 5th from Jupiter sons, 

from h irr"-^iii,
venus wife and the gt from saturn deatrr. rnl 

should r""*"J
c onsidera t thesea nd declarer eratcde ffectsi l;i;;;:

Notes : From these three verses,t he constant 
bmerge Karakas

a s under as normalryd iscusseian  standardr iterature
astrology : o n

The S'rn - father
The Moon - mother
Mars - brothers( and sisters)
Mercury - maternarl elatives
Jupiter - Sons( and daughters)
Venus - wife (or husband)
Saturn - death( or longeviiy)

sTqrt {rflirkrlTFq trtrg.ra}rrwrna r
Qaq wqfil ETriTf€qrqr : fMrq{rq &qf uR{rr
sd tqH q fqes frw: t;-a{irTr {T: I
t tr{ fir<firrfr{ r{rrrg fniqa, ulqll
T{TTqr t gri r.ri cdqrTcqrqrq ETfr q I I
$rqff, 6.r$F.[<qr*fr ri,iq q q- ftqilr: uletl
sqfiTeliqeiTrl tgr;qls;q qR *;arr: I
ltEE a{gqrq$r.q: q}sfq .r1.q!Fir,i qil lRqrr
flqr;qisfq fr qra: frarnl ,6,r{+| 
qlsfq ilsrfiql fqs t qfiq " 

lvige: nRQ.rr
awdwvgma) ttw rrrfil frrqqn r
qd gqrgariur fiq*$q: sq e\' rrq o r r 

25-30.yoGA KARAKAS (OR MUTUALCOWORKERS) 
O Brahmin, I make below_a :

p "rring ."f"rie-Vncoeg ukarak s 
 to yogakarakas

(or mutualco-workers). planetsi -e.or. 
are in nrutuala 

if 
nsles they

identical with own 
friendly 's*irgrnr s, 

sign. exaltation, 
rn lire or

l'th house,u -pruo"i 
so. Planets be 

s imply significantrlr
(i e. not beingi n fri;; g 

dant, & C) 
the in the 

4th and ascen-
7th do not become, u.nfig.nranr. Even if



322 Brihat Parasara Hora Sasfta

they be placedi n other housesb ut with such dignities as men-

tioned shall becomey ogakarakas'W ith such planets'e vena  per-

s-ono f meanb irth will becomea  king and be affiuent" One born

oitoy"f scion then will surelyb ecomea  king' Thus the effecis
U" aoLt"a considering the number of such planets and the

order the native belongst o.
Notes : Rule I : If two planetsare in mutual angles from

the ascendaoat nd be with dignities like exaltation' own sign or
iriendly sign,t hey.acto n behalfo f eacho ther and are known as
i"r"rp"*-r"rakas or co-workers. If one of the occupantsi s in

tnc to t t rhouse, tbeef fec tswi l l s t i l l bepronounced.Th is isno t
to be consideredf rom the Moon'

Ru|e2 :Eventhoughthecond i t iono fmutua langu|ar i t y
is fulfilled, if the two planets do not enjoy one of the three
dignities required, then there is no correlationship between
tbem.

Rule 3 : If two planetsare mutually angular,b oth being
endowedw ith dignitiei like exaltation,o wn sign or friendly sign'
they will becomec oworkersa lthough not placedi n angles from
the ascendant.

Theser ules are exemplifiedi n the undernotedc harts' with
'referencet o the said three rules.



Chapter 32 323



324 Brihat Porasara Hora Sastra

In cbart l, Saturna nd the the Sun are in mutual angles
from the ascendanat nd in their own signs. Hencet hey will act
as co-workersc asringa waymutuale nmity. And Saturnalthough
a dire maleficf or Scorpio ascendanwt ill become a Yogakaraka
by virtue of mutual angularity with the Sun having fulfilled
dignity reQuirements.

In chart 2, Mars and the Suna re in mutual angles from
the ascendanbt ut do not possesa ny dignity like exaltation' or
own houseb ut are debilitated. Hencet hey will not act as Yoga
giving planets.

In chart 3, both Jupitera nd Saturna re not angtlar from
the ascendanbt ut are investedr vith exaltationp ositions. Hence
both the planetsw ill mutuallyr epresenat nd becomef avourable
in their Dasap eriods. Also, seet he chart of Sri Morarji Desai
under sloka 110,c h. 24 in which Jupiter, Saturna nd Mars play
as mutualc o-workers.

It is specificallys tatedt hat the lOth housep ositionf or one
of the planetsi n the circumstanc$b ecomese xceedinglyf avour-
able. In the examplec hart 1, the Suni s in the l0th withParas-
para Yogakarakaq ualification in oppositiont o Saturn'H encet he
Sun will exceedinglyre vealb eneficiarle sults.Devoid of Saturno r
any other co-worker,t he Sun in the lOth will not be that power-
ful. In other words,b y virtue of co'workership,t he Sun's role
gets immeasurablYfo rtified.

Therea re somes choolso f thought which do not consider
coworkershipa c given in rule 3 above.

qqTsd qErqaprTfq firitf ltFlfir(tfi?r I
Er;Rrr q?rrftd qq fqqr{riq6r(6rl llltll
g?rrTrdt ht{tqq qr(rr{6+{ Q r
grfir{{isqiilirs Efla g 6frq{: llllll
gt gii ffitq q.-df {Fdqqren:I 
gili rEl a: W dsfr .6I{t6 EilIt llllll
gfr Tq, gE: €tql gatl'rr: fca: qfa:t 
gwwtgil dt<} F{qq qrqtFr<rfiIl:ll Yll

3l-34. HOUSE SIGNIFICANCE : I now narrate the
significancoef  the houses. Thc first housed enotesthe soul (and



Ahaptert I t25
self),the2nd house wife,the llth preborn, the 3rd younger
brothers/sisters, - 

the 5th progenya nd the 7th house Iil,
also said that a planet in the 5th becomesa  karakar o"ri iw":r e. ine
significatorso f the housei n order are : the Sun,J upiter,M the ;;

Moon, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Saturn, Jupiier.' t;;."ry:
Jupitera nd Saturn.

Notes : The karakatwaso f eachh ouse are betters ignified
in ch. I I supra.T he readerm ay consultt he saidc haptera i 
Certain ,*,"1i

indicationsa re additionali n the presentc ase.
The significatoro f eachb havai s enunciatedi n 

above. sloka 
For 34

an easygrasp,t hesea re :
1..T he Sun Ist house( self,s oul, constitutione tc.)
2. Jupiter 2nd house( family,f inance,w ifec tc.)
3. Mars 3rd house( couragel,a ter-borne tc

.4. The Moon ) 
4th house( mother)

5. Jupiter 5th house( progeny)
6. Mars 6th house( enemies)
7. Venus 7th house( wife, conjugalb lisse tc 
8. Saturn )

8th house( longeviry)
9. Jupiter 9th-house( fortunes,r eligion etc.)

10. Mercury lOth house( honour)
I l. Jupiter llth house( pre-born)
12. Saturn l2th house( expenditure)

Although we haves latedt he significatorso f the bhavas
c r a np a e s  t be e t i  l n t , o

erch bhavas ignifiesm ore than what is stated
above. In that caset he significatorc an atso be different. 
example, For

Jupiteri s karakaf or the gth house wt icn 
he is neans 

holding the portfolio tr,ai
of the native,s fortunes. 

question When the
o ffather arisesf rom the gth house,t he significato

i h u tr  . h s t e S n  ei
Or take the caseo f l2rh house. The 1ienifi;t;; 

Saturn. The i;
r2th housei ndicatesfi nal emancipation

c a 
whi h s welr 

Saturn for
i s not the indicator but Ketu. Thus 

approach a detailed
to significanceth rough bhavasis  required.

giFtrqFltrlt ITqT?:c rFnFeqqi qTqq{ |
Ttrqdtql T;Er{rT vqeruaqqT: nlll
qil wqT: Tlrrrq[rkn:T TraqTfa qtf,q t 

q frq r
gqt ]  ql qmrntd, 

ilfq, qqutulqrl



326 Brihat Parasara Hora Sasnd

rmn qrtrit trrrtlqt: tlcnql faqqaqlt
qsi iqlqqriur gqdsft {* niq ttlutt

3 5 - 3 ? . O e x c e l l e n t o f t h e B r a h m i n s , a f t e r k n o w i n g t h e
merits of the lst housee tc. the good and bad effects'bed eclared'

iiii,lia, 8th,'6th, 2nd and l2th are malefic bhavas' Associat'

i o n w i t h t h e s e h o u s e s w i l l i n f l i c t e v i l s . A n g l e s a n d l r i n e s a r e
;;p;;;t bhavas,t he associationw ith which turns even evils

into ausPiciousness.
Notes : The 6 bhavasv z' llth, 3rd, 8th, 6th' 2nd and

I 2th ; adverse: A planetowningo r occupyingo ne of the said

housesw ill becomea  functional maleflc and hencea dversary'
l--- Th. other 6 bhavas,v iz. ascendant4, th, sth' ?th' 9th and

lo tharegoodhouses .P |anetsassoc ia tedwi th thesehouseswi l l
pro"e favourablea lthoughb y naturee vil or adverse'

Also seec h. 34 for more information'

stsTrF t(ntnqqlsqlq: ll 1Qll
Chapter3 3

Effects Of Karakamsa
qwsf wqqeqrfiT tntiqlqd Gq ! t
lcrFElrrRri Tqt{i qqFt{ rgfifqilq ll t ll

l. O Brahmin,a s laid down by Lord Brahma, I now tell
vou about the effectso f Karakamsai dentical with Aries etc.
' 

Not"r : Karakamsai s the Navamsao ccupiedby the Atma
Karaka planet. The Atmakarakai s the one who traversedt he
ttigh.., number of degreese tc' (devoid of Rasi), among the 8
plinets, from Sun to Rahu. Theseb ave beenc xplained i6 the
previouschaPters.

Tt qqrqrqkr tqii eriqnnt I
qin qqsql fqq t qqq{e fqiqe: ttRtt



Chapter3 3 tn
lqffi qftr1 gqfl?i ql"'.'r I
fqaimi ilRq nogarffiuerrw: nltl
6tki q qq*fil: fuqiri {qqlr{qqq I
wu: wleasqw qid auref6oqnw{' uytt 
g-di{i a eFrrqw a} qilfiftflqill q€:r 
qFdqi€ {"* {tfir: {tsr ilg: qffi rrtrr
uifti sTrr3€qta qad <rqrrrfer
q6rit @qtitt;gfu: dqqcaqrTr qn
ric-1wr-lqrqniqt* qqfr frfiqc: r
6uuifr iT ilsTrlfiq,Knl qrqt siT: netl
r|aiqi or<*, wral gftavq Gqqrq t r
ils{Iq nqiE€ ? qd qrqdlffrtr rcrr

2-8. KARAKAMSA VARIOU.S ,S/G/VS. ' If Atmakaraka
be in Aries Navamsa,t here will be nuisance from rats and cats
at all times. A maleficj oining will further increaseth e nuisance.
Should Atmakaraka be in Taurus Navamsa, happiness from
quadrupedsw ill result. Shouldh e be in Gemini Navamsa,t he
nativew ill be afflictedb y itch etc. If he be in CancerN avamsa,
therewill be fcar from wateretc. If he be in Leo Navamsa,
fear will be from tiger etc. If he be in Virgo Navamsa,.it ch,
corpulence,f ire etc. will causet rouble while in Libra Nav4rnsa,
the Atmakarakaw ill make onea  trader and skilful in making
robesetc. Scorpio Navamsah olding the said planet will bring
troubles from snakesetc. and also affiiction to mother's breasts.
There witl be falls from height and conveyancees tc. if it is
SagittariusN avamsat hat is occupiedb y Atmakaraka. Capricorn
Navamsa in this respect denotes gains from water-dwellrng
beingsa nd conch, pearl, coral etc. If it is Aquarius Navamsa
holding the said planet,t he native will construct tanks etc.
And in Pisces Navamsa the Atmakaraka will grant final
emancipation. A beneflc'sa spectwill removee vils while that of
a maleflc will causen o good.

6rt6iri qt frr ! il'iid q ttqrt I
uqdfrfhil ildl qrEfi qqfr r(kfi: ilQ.rl



tze Brihat ParasaraH ora Sastra

sqimeqrFlf?: iri qli qr qtq{fqil: r
ua-&aqfr qrfr fq{fqarqtf aiq rr1 o r r
gqrt c. fs*r ! ri=q-Fqei-qm{ir 
rrq{{Qfi qrr'A 'iscria1a fqf{iq 1t trl

9-ll. O Brahmin, if there be onty benefics in the
Karakamsaa nd the Navamsao f Lagnaa nd be aspcctedb y bene-
fics,t he nativewill undoubtedlybecomea  king. Should the
angles/trinefsr om the Karakamsab e occupiedb y beneficds evoid
of malelica ssociationth, e nativew ill be endowedw ith wealth
and learning. The combrnationo f benefic and malefic will in
this c:ontexyti eldm ixedr esults. If the Upakheta( or upagraha,
vidcs loka5  ch. 32) is in its cxaltations ign, or own/frienlys ign,
and is devoido  f malefic aspect,t hc nativc will go to heavens
afterdeath.

qaTss(rTTd(q sTr* qrr<r[r+: r
Rqrid$qqr fd sci q?i fqsqst:l lRtl

12. If the Atmakarakai s in ths divisionso f the Moon,
Mars'orV enus,t hc natiVew ill go to others'w ives. Otherwise,
the contrarywill prevail.

srwii qql qrdl ilqflriqt Gq r I
RftEfn lruq fuer{ qqe fqfrqau: {  t tl
sqi!, {qn qlt Eftir: $ilgel ntq r
lffi* ml flsfq {HqTE"qt  qtail utytl
qn qq* Firi mqrfqrqfirqmqr: 
drfqaq:llrilqqrlq tfa-fqarwFqa: rrt  {rr
g6qt s6frtawT @ eini nrl r
Ti ntfqrq: t,rft <tqdtql si.ar: ntqll
Til Tqt{Frit ErRt: €g'c}fqard'f( r
<qlalrra ugaq) qrdqr c\a;agn lfstl
frqlerlsvrlt fqq ! ilqi nls? i{rq: I
lqqott T{rr{lni *d qkq ilrail rrqerr



Chapte3r t t29
13-18. EFFECTS OF PLANETS IN KARAKAMSA : O

Brahmin,i f the Sun is in the Karakamsat,h e nativew ill be enga-
ged in royal assignmentsIf. the Full Moon is there,he will enjoy
pleasureas nd be a scholar;m ore so if Venusa spects. If strong
Mars is in Karakamsa,h e will uset he weapon spear, will live
through fire and be an alchemist Sbould strongM ercury be
in Karakamsah,e will be skilfuli n arts and trading, be intelli-
genta nd educated. Jupi.terin  Karakamsa denoteso ne doing
gooda cts,e ndrwedw ith spiritualisma nd Vedic learning. One
will be endowedwrth a longevityo f 100y ears, be sensuous
and will look after stateaffairsi f Venusi s in Karakamsa.S aturn
in Karakamsaw ill gives uchl ivelihood as due to the native's
family. Rahu in Karakamsad enotcsa  thief, a bowman,a 
machinerym aker,a nd a doctort reatingp oisonouas fll ictions.I f
Ketu be in Karakamsao, new ill deali n elephantasn d be a thief

qfEq a.{T€ Eii qqt{ Stfa: sqrqfr r
{qEce} qd +q qIqE6el tlil€E u t qrl
quwqrrfigal fqqt€ft qh rETI 
qltfer* TTq6iqi wqrqqltiq* uRorr
srdqr{T t q{qFil eqi{qq€Igtr': r
aftq t*ifq t qrlq qf6Fl ie 'Trqen Rttl
qFGt Seqr q6l ue"tl16a6nr: 
{sE€ g Ria t lqerq} ir qmer rRRrr

19-22.R AHU-SUN IN KARAKAMSA : Shoutd Rahu
and the Sun be in Karakamsath erew ill be fear from snakesi;f  a
benefica spectsthe said combinationt here will be no fear but a
malefica spectswiil bring death (through serpents). If Rahu
and the Sun occupybenefic Shadvargasb, eing in Karakamsa,
one will be a doctor treating poisonousa ffiictionsw hile the
aspect from Mars on the said combination denotest hat the
nativew ill burn either his own houseo r that of others.M ercury's
aspect,in steadof that of Mars, will bot causeth e saide ffects.I f
Rahu and the Sun be in Karakamsaa nd be in a malefic'ss ign in
aspecto  Jupiter,one will burn neighbouringh ouse while the
aspectof Venuswill not causes ucha n event.



330 Brilat ParasaraH ora Sasna

Tfq+? til Tqi{i Wqoior {tfwil r
aliqaual qra: rq{ q}r}sqqTq +( rrqlrr
r$$e qth* fqqel qr frt{a: r
quqri qqEe"tulq rq* aTsd ivrR:r rlvrr

23-24.G ALIKA IN KARAKAMSA : Should the Full
Moon aspecth e Karakamsa-placeGdu lika, the nativew ill lose
his wealtht o thieveso r will himself be a thief. If Gulika is in
Karakamsa but is unaspectedb y others, one will administer
poison to otherso r will himself die of poisoning. Mercury's
aspecti n this contextwill give larget esticles.

q*al Fnsi{i q w$i faqlnq ! r
qRRq suhlq] qr mu@E: srqTqnil Rtrr
Itgifui eRaa. {tfea} qrq* qr: r
lurfnyi fafiqT qrqi qrie} t1qqn tr,tl
tq{*ffii rRqT aru'lga: qqsqilr 
grdilg* qE& qrqe iTs? ina: rtlsrr
ilcff wfaatq ei wa: icqlsqqur \ r
nftqrifeTe aftn1 ila: i;qf€iaar1uQctl
$qq*fafi Ftrqrrqid qalc\ r
tfil i*qa: qhii 6r(Ftd$d faq ! rrRerr

25.29. EFFECTS OF ASPECTSO N KETU IN KARA-
KAMSA .' tf Ketu is in Karakamsain  aspect o a malefic,o ne's
ears will be severed or he will suffer from diseaseso f ears.
Venusa spectingd enotesone initiated into religions order. One
will be devoido f strength if Mercury and Saturn aspect. If
Mercury and Venusa spect,h e will be the son of a female slave
or of a femaler enarried. With Saturn'saspecto ne will perforrn
penanoeo r bea servantor will be a pseudo-ascetic.V enus and
the Sun togethera spectingwill makeo ne servet he king. Thus,
O Brahmin, are told briefly the effectsof Karakamsa.

etnqui q {r{r<q{ rara grqErftsr: 
afrg 1fiml iiqfr{qTsnoi $an ulorl



Chapter3 t 331

trl deqfrq?erT: qI{ g.<lg dugat:t
<ql ars{lalfa:r rrq rnrinq fafiq'i lll l ll

30.3I. EFFECTSO F THE 2ND FROM KARAKAMSA :
If the 2nd from Karakamsafa lls in the divisionsof Venus/Mars,
one will be addictedt o others' wives and if Venus or Mars
aspect he said 2nd,t he tendencyw ill last till death. If Ketu is
ttre Znd from Karakamsai n a division of Venus/Mars, such
addictionw ill not prevailwhile the positiono f Jupiterwill cause
sucha n evil. Rahu in the saidcasew ill destroyw calth'

rqirrq qdo'i qrt wa: {(: ltillqqq I
afrnl {qqt qrd: fia* ile ina: tt11tt

32. EFFECTS OF THE 3RD FROM KARAKAMSA:
A malefic in the 3rd from Karakamsaw ill make onh valorous
while a benficw ill make one timid.

ainreagrimt waqqifnt t
a? il rq}tqi di qra: {rfirirrll q}q rrtQrr
nfa<rEqta fml Endrq q fweqql t
qfiad gr'tgrai gwtt altti 1(q ttiYll
ttar g rfeqt fiqd Emtrerm i faq I r
q;E' iEtf,T.[* t{i qt*qlq: sqTqil ll{tt

33-35.E FFECTS OF THE 4TH FROM KARAKAMSA :
If the 4th from Karakamsab e occupiedb y Venusa nd the Moon,
one will own palacial( or large)buildings. Similari s the effectof
an exaltedp lanet in the said 4th. A house made of stones is
denotedb y the occupation of Rahu and Saturn. Mars and Ketu
indicatea  housemadeo f bricks wbile Jupiterd enotesone made
of wood. The Sun so related will give a houseof grass. If the
I\{oon be in the 4th from Karakamsa,o ne will have union with
his wife in an uncomPoundedh ouse.

qlral Eq<r6sql qqqhTq dqq: t
11f?i1Qi qGeT$ai fn{qii sEnqiill lqrl
twgtal g qrcFrt fraqtTfqrren] *q r
*gEcal g rEuft rqr'frlsqEl &q t tti\stt



332 Srihat ParasaraH ora Sastra
vtrggfc* rd tTri {afaetenqq I
tu t|.trT€wq qrtlss''tt ?rTrt 11qilp Qetl 
rql qqTqt qTil: ni Filtrft q\ r
vr-tl ugd* ia) rrql a alAqqareeeqar;qu lrqerr
*'at q qfawq;a't qraq] ,ru* tFq ! t
ut,ii g rfqqfrt't $rarrrtiqTrrn EFTi:ly otl

36.40.E FFbicTS OFTHESTH FROM KARAKAMSA :
IfR ahu and Mars are in the 5th from Karakamsa,o ne will suffer
from a pulmonary consumption, more so if the Moon aspects
them. Thc aspecot f Mars on the saidh ousew ill bring boils or
ulcers.K etu'sa specot n ths saitl housew ill caused ysenterayn d
said-diseasceasu sedb y (impurc)w ater.I f Rahua nd Gurikab e in
the house therc will bc fear liorn mean people aud poison.
ShouldM ercuryb e in thc saidh ouse,t he native witt Uea n-ascetic
of the highesto rder or one hordings taff. The sun and Mar. in
the saidh ouser esprcctivedrye noteo ne using a knife ancrs pear.
saturnd enoreas bowmani n this context. Rahu and retu in
the said house respectivcryd enotea  machinista nd a watch
maker. Venusi n the saidh ousew ill makeo ne a poet and an
eloqucnts peakcr.

tl|i{i aiq=q} q6fc ffiaqnqi rr q?qSEI 
{*q fmf}agn}ss} aa}stqen}q ft ?'yltl
gaon *eilde H,ifqE q?qtn iTcrrI 
*EiqTtafqrqrfq, ;Te rrit nT|e{fi}sfqR T uyltl
dqfqn: ginel iq {}qi(nrilqr r
(qrqsTg {|rqil Tr'|ilil} rfqqr FliT: ilvltl
ffi'q qi<qqlrril: qTQF[il:rEr rrqfi: I
*gn qtqaalsnl rqunlv aria q uvytl
RrqEr[tTqf sflq: €r( grure;ual faq t r
Fqivtq Gdlqil: +faq s-nlq qEfia f( rrvru

41.45. EFFECTS OF KARAKAMSA AND THE sTH
THEREFROM : lf Jupitera nd the Moon are in Karakamsao r
the 5th thereof,t he nativew ill be an author. Venusi n the said



Chapter33 333
placew ill make one an ordinary writer while Mercury will give
still lessere ffectsi n this respect. Should Jupiterb e alone in the
said house,o ne will be a knower of everything,b e a writer, and
be versedi n Vedasand Vedantap hilosophy, but not an oratorian
or a grammarianM. ars in this respecdt enotesa  logician,M ercury
a Mimamsaka( follower of Mimamsap hilosophy,o ne of the six
chief systemso f Hindu philosophy), Saturn one dull-witted in
the assembly,t he Sun a musician, the Moon a follower of
Sankhya Philosophy (of sage Kapila enumerating 25 true
principlesw ith emphasiso n final bliss),and versedi n rhetorics
and singing,and Ketu or Rahu an astrologer. Should Jupiter
be relatedt o the said positions(causedb y others than him), the
effecteds tatedw ill effectivelyc omet o pass. Somesay that the
2nd from Karakamsab e alsosimilarly considered.

€tqrrd q66qi qfi n{n} qrqe qa: r
qrQsae€Fc Edtisfr sci {r!ilq nYqrl

46. EFFECTS OF THE 6TH FROM KARAKAMSA : lf
the 6th from Karakamsai s occupiedb y a malefic,t he native will
be an agriculturistw hile he will be indolent if a benefici s there.
The 3rd from Karakamsab e also similarly considered

qi qilg6 q€I qTq1i rqrftgnr{t t
il? FIT{dt {*, ti *q nandl llY\ell
<ql q €Sn tqrr, ntl qrfq {dsfirfit t
.aqfigqdat ttfitrslq r rd q fqu{r Tlilt llve ll

47.48. EFFECTS OF THE 7TH FROM KARAKAMSA :
' If the Moon and Jupiter are in the 7th from Karakamsa, the
native will begeta very beautiful wife. Venusi n the said house
denotesa  sensuousw ife while Mercury indicatesa  wife versed
in arts. The Sun so relatedw ill givea  wife confining domestic
core while Saturn denotesa  wife of a higher age bracket, or a
pious/sickwife. Rahu in this context will bring a widow in
rharriage.

garfugi <ti ?qirrq dfutgtan t
ntf umgcserq{eeiqfeaqgi l lYerl



334 Brihat parasara Hora Sasta

49. EFFECTS OFTHESTH FRO,W KARAKAMSA : tf
a benefico r the planet owningt he 8th from Karakamsab e in ihe
8th from Karakamsa,t he nativew ill be long-livedw hilea  maiefic
so placedw ill reducet he life span. Aspect/conjunctioonf  both
beneficsa nd maleficsw ill yield a mediumspano $life.

rfTts'iffiq qEi {qrgtifHil |
qiq{r{t N $FRT:s qu{'fqqa} q{: ntotl
tqi{nEir ffii qr+ w,raqgtfu*t  
rqudfqqal irrFi fqcfiqdt q qT?i*l t{ttl
iqi 5n5iqrEq vrfr-nggilf'afr 
geatd v\ irrFr:v truiEf egr} n{: tltRn
6r(niltT"q ffi} gtuqgRfufr r
iTErsfqg eilkt Tqrq gttln{ r rrq+ ntltl
r6ra6i{tiq ffi+ qnntqttnt r
qsfltfqrfril il qwf qrt€rft6'{ ntYll
r[t1l[,l{n€it iqt 1ftgal*fw* faq ! r
rtt{t tgq-q-q*1 ffa.fi] wfr 4aq lt{trl
iqi +q*ii geuil q g*faf rr
r{tc}qfi qlswc} fqqd} 'iq qrqe utqtl

50.56. EFFECTS OF THE gTH FROM KARAKAMSA :
If the 9th from Karakasmsai s aspectedo r occupiedb y a benefic,
the nativewill be truthful, devotedto eldersa nd attached to his
own religion. If a malefici s so relatedas above, one will be
attachedt o his religion in boyhoodb ut will take to falsehoodin 
old age. If Saturna nd Rahu are so relatedas above, one will
betray his eldersand beaverset o ancient learning. If Jupiter
and the Sun are so relatedas above,o ne will betray his elders
and will be disobediento  them. Should Mars and Venusb e so
relateda s above,and joining in six identicalvargasa,  femalei ll-
relatedt o the nativewill die. Mercury and the Moon so related
will causeim prisonmento f the nativedue to associationw ith a
femalenot of his own. If Jupiteri s alone related to the 9th
from Karakamsab y aspector by conjunction, the nativew ill be
addictedt o femalesa nd be devotedt o sensuale njoyments.



Chapter 33 335

rFI{.6i{rliq Enl qvdaltfe,* r
frq{qn} rtq are} rrFft<}q il{f6qq ntetl
Eqrn EFT{fiI{niit qrqdag*fa* t
EqFITi silqt Qrfq: fmqJrta qfqa:n tctl
{{ri firuiflcq quqngifa* t
AqFtt( q6flrqwr nqq{r<} ;tr: tt{Q.tt
fi,r(6l{nEq E{tq <fqffiqefqt I
gattett fqs t qnft\ ttaqqr1 uiq ttqott

57-60. EFFECTS OF THE IOTH FROM KARAKAMSA :
tf the l0th from Karakamsab daspectedo r conjoinedb y a bene-
fic, the native will have firm riches, be sagaciouss, trong and
intelligent. A malefics o relatedwill causeharm to his profes'
sion and depriveh im of paternalb liss. Mercury and Venuss o
relatedw ill confer many gainsi n business( or profession)a nd
will make him do many greatd eeds. The luminariess o related
to the l0th from Karakamsaa nd if be in aspect o or conjunct-

"' ion with Jupitert he nativew illacquire a kingdom.

€{i{rli6n{i Fqti qrrdagtfrrt t
uq*wgdt <tc: wiwig il$r5( uirtrl
qrnrili qqtn g STrTqtcf,Ttt5tlt:t 
fdqrd tq!ffi*t qq qrq* ils" dqlq: uqRtl

61.62. EFFECTS OF TIIE ILTH FROM KARAKAMSA :
If the l lth from Karakamsab e aspectedb y or conjuncta benefic,
the nativewill enjoy happinessfr om cobornapart from gaining
in everyundertakingo f his. If a malefici s in the said llth the
nati','ew ill gain by.questionablem eans,b e famousa nd valorous.

slrr6'i{|q EqqFqIi q('It q1Eqq} t\ t
qu1aqfrsqQ* ql r6tw+ q qi$it{ nrrltl
rnriltr< aqq€erti €q}w(Q {qqt I
f{rrfaqtq* ir(q qrrq}fiqqrTrrrEuqvtl
nnrivnl 6ql +ill qwialilfuil r
f,Er g qrqil !fia: HrtEqqErrriFr{r qrrr



336 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

tri qfv qr tcl mnninq uqt Rqi r
qwtiir qqd rIT{vqT{qttTrIIq llqill
ad q *qil *al wgtilfer*fq qr r
? iril qrq* gftn: qwld a qrqfr ulretl
t|qw igt til) mr<dnq aqqfrq* r
fqnqfta$*Tqw frfqd{i faq}fiq ! nqcrr
q?iq igt *al mr<fiiqrrra qqf€qtr 
qlqf rrRa{}wq rnftan} qui rr: nqQ.tl
{gITiTqq r Ri{lTi fi till rRriqrTE aqqRqi r
qerqi qsqui qfiilqfilnl e} uqfaaq ueorl
Fii cgil +ilf er;qmill q*;tr: r
icqql gtlfuuf Twr fnqqfiarilTu \efu 
rr-d.n crqit grrl *Ti qrt<-mqr 
qfta: rwisq ttri firFqqRr { qr neRtl
qilTrt{Tq aqt qlR; qrqT1n}a r n\ r
rqrfq ql}trn qftmarq I dvrq:r r\eQrr
qrqaisfqn al {* ffiisfq q[il*qs: t
wrfl5'Rqilt q.Srtqlq sd atq rruvrr

63.74. EFFECTS OF THE I2TH FROM KARAKAMSA :
If the l2th from Karakamsah asa  benefic,t he expensesws ill be
on good accountw hile a maleficw ill causeb ad expenses.I f the
said l2th bev acantt hen alsogood effects( in respecto f expenses)
will follow. If there be a beneficp laneti n exaltationo r in own
housei n the l2th from Karakamsao r if Ketu is so placed and
aspectedb y or conjuncta  benefico ne will attain heavensa fter
death. one will attain final emancipationif  Ketu is in the l2th
(from Karakamsa)i dentical with Aries/Sagittariusa nd is
aspectedb y a benefic. If Ketu in the l2th from Karakamsa
and be with aspect/conjunctioonf  a malefic one will not attain
final emancipationIf. the Suna nd Ketu are in the said l2th the
nativew ill worship Lord Siva. The Moon and Ketu in the

said l2th denOtesa worshipper of Gauri (a con-sort of
Lord Siva) Venusa nd Ketu in the said l2th denotesa 



Chapter 33 337
worshippero f Lakshmi (a consorto f Lord Vishnu)a nda  wealthy
person. Mars and Ketu in the said l2th denotes a worshippcr
of Lord Subramanya(a n offspringof Lord Siva). Rahu in the
l2th from Karakamsaw ill make one worship Durga or some
meandeity. Ketu alone in the said l2th denotesS ubramanya's
or Ganesa'sw orshipper. If Saturn is in the said l2th in a
malefic'ss ign one will worshipmeand eities. Venusa nd Saturn
in the said l2th in a malefic's sign will also make one worship
meand eities. Similar inferencesc an be drawn from the 6th
Navamsac ountedf rom Amatya Karaka's Navamsa.

nr{fiiqrrq fam}qtt qrqdrat Gq! t
qtq?il Tt??-fl??il} qrTA Fnse dwq: rt\elrr
qrtr dttH ae ilil frtqr) q+( r
{tfirttfer,i alwl rtqtrqd ntq nequ

75-76. MISCELLANEOUS MATTERS (upto stoka 84) :
O Brahmin, if therc are two maleficsi n a trine from Karakamsa,
the native will have knowledge of Mantras (sacred spells) and
Tantras (mysticalf ormularies for the worship of deitiesf or attain-
ment of super-humanp owers). If a malefic simultaneously
aspectst he said yoga,t he nativew ill use these learningsf or
malevolentp urposesw hile a benefic'sa spect will makeh im use
the samef or public good

{F{d fqul Tqii wqnt q*nr: r
tilio'i q FEqEt: e{q}rrqT}r iq rrsurr
{rr1"i g<T q?i qroqf{qt't q+f,r:
qlqqsi q€rqlrft rmfqarfeal viq rrseu 
*g16i gd di {tqgodt nailqi I
q({ wa}arsQ fraril} rrg.3q} q& rrsa,rr
errtql q\ ilrrr q.?E6eal  fafiqa: r
€qt{nEg <t g,iatsfq* qq: {Rqa: gErl:t eotl
Req,Tfq$nq r€q irErr rlql q inq: r
r(qif qqrlql qr ae*a"t ffi qlilucttl



338 Brihut ParasaraH ora Sastra

wutggfed ir? fqqiiul fqqrfta:r 
sinnrq rrq+ qri +qil dfisri flql llcRtl
ugfrEfq€r slrflr rrrflI" r tinq: r
H q ibqil ir? qfewq;arRr6n: cltl

\  . \
!q r<c€d .Tr Eoit qqfa rTr;TrIr: 
fildr""t il{n <qt, w} qqrTqr}wiqrrevrr
*qfr q gi ar wa: gfrrw?flrrr: I

77-84L.Ift he Moon is in the Karakamsain  aspecto  Venus,
the native will be an alchemista nd if be in aspectt o Mercury he
will be a doctor capableo f curinga ll diseases.I f the Moon is in
the 4th from Karakamsaa nd be in aspect to Venus, the native
be affiicted by white leprosy; if in aspect to Mars blood and
biliousd isordersa, nd if to Ketu black leprosy. Should Rahu
and Mars be in the 4th or sth from Karakamsa the native will
suffer from pulmonary consumptioh and if there be Moon's
aspects imultaneouslyth is affiictionw ill be certain. Mars alone
in the 4th/5th from Karakamsaw ill cause/ulcers.I f Ketu be in
the 4th or 5th from Karakamsao ne will suffer from dysenterya nd
affiictionsd ue to (impure) water. Rahu and Gulika in the 4th/5th
from Karakamsaw ill make one a doctor curing poisonousa ffic-
tions or will causet roublest hroughp oison. Should Saturn be
alone in the 4th or 5th from Karakamsa,t he native will be skil-
ful in archery. Ketu lonely placed in the 4th/sth from
Karakamsawill make one a maker of watchese tc. Mercury so
placedw ill make one an ascetico f the highesto rder or an ascetic
holding staff. Rahu, Sun and Mars respectively in these places
denotea machinist, a knife user and spear/arrowu ser.

Fqt{iT r rlrqt Tqtnt--T"i-r rfRqalil{Tu c{tl
T?qont uiw16; wifqqfqvtr<q: r
itr ieqfQ frFeqrrm'* riq rreq rr

85-86.The Moon and Jupiteri n the Karakamsao r the 5th
therefromd enotesa  writer well-versedin  all brancheso f learning.
Thc gradeo f writershipw ill comparativelyd escendin  the *r. of
Venusa nd furthcr in the caseof Mercury if so placed as above.



Chapter 33 339

td ta ilalsqtn;mrf rqui r
n" {* fifiqHt firartil{iT qqrqn ilcetl
e{faqnfiwn} dti a qTrit q sqrfiq r
{raqil{qf s{i,iq,i<i<rnfaq aqirrccrr
sqme) qi( Gnq sqil€qnrri {rqt r
dfqtsnl qa;1agm€qrqqi 1d rrcerr
eqid qr rsqi ql* qrd iqrfqrl qia r
qri' q qiqqlqr: urfqeainat rrqnlu eotl
<e't iErraferiq rflaalq sqrqi r
*'et q qfqaa: rarwffi;{re7frrnq; uQ,ltl

. €FrrrrTxrcEifrf b{twa;adt uiq r
Bdlt a qdtt q rri{n*i fqqrQq uQ,err
qri qewmdi licfi Errrt€rrq tuqf eq I

87-92+.PLANETS IN sTH FROM KARAKAMSA: Should
Venusb c in the 5th from Karakamsa,t he native will be a poet,
be eloquentand be a poet. Jupiter replacing denotest hat he
will be an expbnent and be all-knowing but bb unable
to speak in an assembly. He will be further a grammarian
and a scholari n Vedasa nd Upanishads. Saturni n this context
will makeone ineffectivei n an assembly,w hile Mercury will
make him a skilful in Meemamsa(o ne of the six chief Darsanas).
Mars in Karakamsao r the 5th therefrom will make one Justice
while the Moon denotesa  SankhyaYogi, a rh.etor or a singer.
The Sun in the said 5th will makeo ne learned in Vedanta and
music. Ketu in the said Sth will make one a nathematiciaann d
ekilful in astrology. Should Jupiterbe relatedt o the saidK etu,
thesel earningsw ill be by inheritance. All thesea s well apply to
the 2nd/3rd from Karakamsa and to the Karakamsai tself agrbrt
from applying to the 5th from Karakamsa.

*a} reinqGdtl qr Tdtt Tmuqnq[ ir rrrlrr
qrq€ci fqriiq TrFrE] fiFr{q: r

93-93+.S hould Ketu be in the 2ndi3rd from Karakamsa,
the nativew ill be defective in speech,m ore so if a malefic
aspectsK etu as above.



340 Brihat Parasara Hora Sasta

stqrrFqtaTEqi [qqrfq Gdlqrtqrnqq]: rr e vr r 
*q{q: qrqsrrt ar4ra} fdqa: I
stTlswutq  t frrn: (FFH1fi:f ffir qqr 1C1l
*{re"qmq[d iqr: q{ qqqil: r
qi {mq{rilfiEfrqr6aqq}fHq!  ueqtl
!r{€Ft q fq*q} qh: tr6r}sgv: r
q{ruTrrqgq} st1GTrTu rulq r{q leetl
iqcrrrfr q'tqlsd qrqsptseiqraqli r
qd il?drfaqrqrni gatftni rq.qar{ uqcll
anqRftqgvriw qd qrcd fqqflqilr r
{fr ieird: s}qd rr<ckrsef qrrTu c.qrl

94-99.I f maleficsb e in the KarakamsaA, rudha Lagnaa nd
the 2nd and 8th from these places,t here will be Kemidruma
yoga;t he effectso f whichw ill be still severcr if the Moon's aspect
be there.T he effectsd uef or thesey ogasw il comet o passi n the
Dasap eriodso f the Rasiso r praners eo'cerned. Kimadruma
Yoga will operate additionalry if there are mateficsin  the 2nd
and 8 from the Rasi whose Dasa will bc in currency. The
resultso f suchy oga will alsob e inauspicious. If the 2nd and
8th in the chart castf or the beginningo f a l)asah ave male6cs,
then also Kemadrumaprevailst hroughoutt he Dasa.

BTeqTl lT€6t{fiTeqTq1: 8 VtI 
Chapter3 4

Yoga Karakas
nnoirrqrr*i qtf *tti rr.n faq t r
qer qrqrftrqilq [{q}rsFf 8Tgl ttl

l. O Brahmin, thus I have told you about the effects
derivablet hrough Krakamsa.N ow listen to tre eifect, out
of planetaryh ousel ord ships. "riring 



Chaptert 4 341
hnFqwq: qlrqT il fErFil qq sFT{ |
ENTt ,iltqd g,{: qrr{n" &rloqql; 11111
Frd *aferlqeqq friiq {rlrq I
qsqq ;rqTr qazt fatiaranta*r rlrr

a

€ctTrt E{Irt ?q R*agegtaii 1
feqeufEqr: e{ qr: {ttFEFTrT: lil: tiytl
aqqfBdtqrdm: sr(qqte r6FTrri{rr: 
rwrftrtrgrlqr€ nqqrqqJr{}qllr rrrrr
ilT rnrqaqlqftan;dqft iI q$TlriT:I 
faqqurf{qe}sq} *wei g (a6il: ||qtl
seloi{ Edt q}q} Fnfilq trqr€F6:I 
r red{iqa'lq}se qqf'{raqdfiq trurr

2.7. NATURE DUE TO LORDSHIPS OF PLANETS :
Beneficso wninganglesw ill not give benefice frectsw hile malefics
owning anglesw ill not remain inauspicious, The lord of a trine
will givea uspiciousre sults.T he lord of the ascendanits  specially
auspiciousa s the ascendanits  an anglea s well as trine. The 5th,
and 9th housesa re specially for wealth while the 7th and toth
are speciallyf or happinessA. ny planeto wning the 3rd, 6th, or
the llth willgive evil effects.The effectsd ue to the lords of the
l2th, and 8th will dependo n their association.I n eachg roup,
the significancew ill be in' the ascendingo rder. The 8th lord is
not auspiciousa s he owns the l2th from the 9th. If the lord of
the 8th simultaneousloyw nst he 3rd,7th or llth, he will prove
specificallyh armful while his simultaneouso wnershipo f a trine
will bestowauspiciouse ffects.T he planet owning a predominant
housew ill stall the effects due to another owning a lesss igni-
ficant housea nd will give his own results.T he 8th lordship of
the Sun and the Moon is not evil.

Notes : The rules given in this part will help us to decide
the gcod and bad planetsf or eacha scendantb asedon lordships.
A summary of these rules is given below to enable use of
suitableapplicationo f lordships.

l. KcnrlradhipatyaD osha:  This blemishg oest o naturalb ene-
fics by virtue of angular lordship. For example,f or Gemini ascen



342 Drihat ParasaraH ora Sasffa

dant the ownershipo f4th and 7th goest o Jupitera nd hence he
is not a beneficf or this ascendantL. agna lord owning an angle
i.e.4thl7thll0th,s halln ot provei nauspicious(E. ven if he owns
an evil house,he is not classifieda s a malefic.) Naturalb enefics
are increasingM oon, Mercury,Jupitera nd VenusT. 'heira ngular
lordsbip blemish will be in the ascendingo rder. That is the
Moon is the leastmalefica od Venus is the mostm aleficb y such
ownership.

2. Maleffc as ownero f angle:  If a malefico wnsa n angle
he will not be inauspicious. This doesn ot meant hat tre wrtt
becomea uspicious(.T hes aBeh as cautiously worded his verse.)
To be auspiciousb y virtueo f angularr ordship,t he malefics houri
simultaneousolyw n a trine.I f he doesn ot own a trine, he will
be neutral by mere angular lordship;n cither he will be disad-
vantageousF. or Libra ascendantS. atruni s classifieads  unsullied
yogakarakab ecauseh e owns the 4th (an angle)a nd the 5th (a
trine).T he Sun's benelicencero  Taurus asccndanct annot be
comparedt o Saturn's for Libra, becauseth e Sunh aso nl-yM oanres
housewhichi s angulart o the ascendantF. or Leo ascendar,t 
becomesa top rank benefica s heo wnsa n angle( 4th) and a trine
(9th). similarly for cancer ascendantT. he sameM ars for capri-
corn asccndanbty  virtue-ofa ngularl ordshipi s not that,up.iio,
becaushee  doesn ot simultaneousloyw n a trine. Sirnilarlyh is rote
for Aquariusascendant.w eak Moon by virtue of angularl ord-
ship remainsju st neutral.

3. Primarilyw earth-giverasr e the rordso f 5th and 9th. The
lords of 7th and lfth contribute to one's happinerr.p act oi
them shouldb e individuarlyw ertdisposedT.r inar lordship to
Jupiterw ill enableh im give weartha bundantrya nd uninteirup-
tedly. . venus becoming rord of 7th or l0rh wil give generar
happinesisf the occupiesa n angleo r a trine.

4. Lords of 3rd, 6th and llth are classifieda s evil planets
while the lords of 2nd, l2th and 8th wifi act accordingto  asso-
ciation. If these lords simultaneousryo wn such another
house,t hey will be significantlyh armful. If sucha  planet simult-
aneouslyo wnsa  trine he will bef avourable.F or exampleJ, upiter
is doubly evil for Libra ascendanat s he ownst he 3id and 6th.
saturn,t hough owning the 8th, will be favourabrefo r a Gemini
nativitya s he is the lord of the 9th as wcll. In consideringtw o



Chapter 34 34?

lordships in any context, the Moolatrikona house has prime
importancea s againstt he other ordinary house. The Moolatri-
kona lordship will reveal itself effectively rather than the other
own house.

5. When twc planets are involved in a context,.t he one
with good lordshipw ill stallt he evil effects of anothcr planet
owning a lessp owerful house.T o wit, if the 9th lord and the 8th
lord are both involvedi n a yoga, the 9th lord will give his good
effectsobstructingt he evilsdue to the 8th lord.

6. We havet he following two setso f good houses,( a) lst,
4th, 7th and the l0th. (b) 5th and 9th. In eachg roupt he benefic
dispositionwill ascendf rom houset o house. That is, Zth lord
is more powerfult han the 4th. The 9th lord is so as against the
5th lord

7. Similarly two setsof evil housesa re before us; (a) 3rd,
6rh and llth. (b) l2th, 2nd and 8th. Here againt he .maleficence
wilt move inthe ascendinogr der. To wit, the llth lord is the
mostevil in his groupw hilet hc 8th lord is so in hisg roup.

8. The summary of points 6 and 7 is : the l0th and 9th
lords are the highestb eneficp lanetsw hile the I lth and 8th loras
are the mosta dlerseT. hus,t he lOthl ord'sc ounterparits  the I lth
lord and the 9rh lord's counterparti s the 8th lord. (lf we consi-
der Saturnf or Aries ascendanth, e getso ne best house and one
worsthouse,i. e.t he lOthand llth housesT. he I tth houseb eing
bis Moolatrikonah, c is predominantlyth e I lth lord rathert han
the l0th lord and hencevery evil. Similarlyh is role for Cemini
ascendanti n which caset he 9th lordship prevailso ver his 8th
lordship aud so he is not cvil but favourable.)

9. The rolesof variousp lanetsa re generallyb asedo n these
groundsa nd what we have had so far is a rough frame-work.
However,n o decisions houldb e takenat one single point. For
actualp icture,t he sagec lassifiesthe planetsf urther in the succe-
eding verses.

10. As far as Rahu and Ketu are conccrned,t hey act
accordingto their position,a ssociationa nd dispositorsr,i de verse
16 infra.

gqdl {rql qkil q?a} qdqq v"qi I
ffit* gq: amet:f iqr qaqrfrrrfqq'rr:r crt



t44 brihat ParasaraH ora Sosta

gdegiw{rma rqqr wrrlf,(q I
dl,i'adft{3er: rrircrr{q q?i}ili,{ tttrt
*?rfuqeqqlala:q urai nfqa] e u: r
qrailga{flqr qqanqJf,ltin{ nlotl

$-rc. NATURAL BENEFICS AND MALEFrcS.. Jupiter and
Venusa re beneficsw hile the Moon is mediocre in beneficence.
Mercury is neutral (i.e. a beneficw hena ssociatewd ith a benefic
and a maleficw hen relatedt o a malefic).M alefics are the Sun,
Saturna nd Mars. Full Moon, Mercury, Jupitera nd Venusa re
strongeri n the ascendingo rder Weak Moon, the Sun, Saturn
and Mars are stronger( in malefic disposition) in the ascending
order. In revealing maleficenced ue to angular rulership, thJ
Moon, Mercury, Jupitera nd Venusa re significantin  the asc"n-
ding order.

Notes:  Jupitera nd Venusa re first ratc beneficsw hile the
Moon is next to them. The Moon's variable dispositionsh ave
beeng iveni n the earlierp agesM. ercury is neutral, i.e. a benefic
in relationt o a benefica nd is a malefici n relation to a malefic.
He has no dispositiono f his own.I f he is atone,h e will be
favourablec. onsideringt he Moon and Mercuryi n benefic lasses,
the four planetsv iz. Moon, Mercury, Jupiter and Venusa re
superiori n the ascendingo rder.T hat is Mercury is more bene-
ficial rhan Moon, Jupiter is more beneficialt han Mercury and
venus is the highestb eneficH. owever,s ome exponentsh old the
view that Jupiter is the highestb enefics, ee, .Subhanampotih',

As regardsm alefics,t he Sun,S aturna nd Mars comeu nder
this classw hen the nodes are excludedf or they do not bave
their own disposition.H ere again,t he sun is the reast maleffc,
saturn is rnoremalefic than the sun; and Mars is the highcsi
maleficas againstt he Sun and Saturn.

talffi tqrdi wrv<g6H I
qni al ftqilf n& g'ds;eit{: fiqa: rrttrr
gahcalferil qrfq fqq] qlqd.r* ?rqrI 
clfuFrqqwu* qfi fqaqrdql r anl qeil rr t  Rr r

ll-12. ANGULAR AND TRINAL LORDSHIhS: If there be
an exchangeb etweena n angular lord and a trinal lord, or if these



Chaptert 4 34s
two lords join in an angle or in a trine, or if a trinal lord is in
angleo r vicev ersa,or if thereb e full aspectb etweenth em, they
causea  yoga.O ne born in sucha  voeaw i4 becomea  king and be
famous.

Notes:  Tbe following permutationsw ill emergefr om these
two versesw hich yogasw ill make the nativef amousg ivingr oyal
status.Thesea re :

(l) exchangeb etwcena n angular lord and a trinal lord.
For exampleG enrini ascendanth aving Mercury in Aquarius
and Saturni n Virgo.

(2) angular.lorda nd trinal lord in a trine, whether they
own or not.

(3) angularl ord and trinal lord in an angle,w hether they
own or not.

(4) trinal lord in an angle,w hetherhe ownso r not.
(5) angularl ord in a trine, whetherhe ownsor not.
(6) angularl ord and trinal lord in mutual opposition (as

full aspecits  required),p articularlyi n good bhavas.

n]oiqrri qtnrq *;irnei q qr4t I
tai nlsi Rqal nss'l fqqiqralqnrr: ulltl

13. If ono and the sarncp lanetg etst he lordshipso f a trine
as well asa n angleor if a planeti s irr an angleo r in a trine, it
will prcve speciallya  yogakaraka.

+iwt*q qrqrri qr ql{aT qqfirRdr I
w fadqfqqtisfq q d;immrea: u lytl

14, AI,|GaLAR LORDSHIP : It has been said that r
maleficowninga n anglewill becomea uspiciotrsw hichi s true only
wheni t simultaneguslyl ords over a trine and not by merely own-
ing an angle.

Note : This aspect has beenclarified in the initial verses
of the presentc hapter.

*at}qtfEqtaq qrqT{rrnfuql l[ln I
irql: €Glr;uqriq r dd qq* ;rt: nlttl

15. If the lords of an angleo r a trine ownssimultaneously
an evil house,he(i.e.t he angularl orcl or the trinal lord)doesn ot



346 Drihat Parasara llora Sa$ra

causea Rajayogaby mere relationss tipulated (as per slokas I I
and 12 above).

Notes : In this context,i f the evil housei s Moolatrikona,
that evil lordshipw ill prevail. Alternativelyi f the angleo r trine
is Moolatrikona,t he evil lordshipi s suppressesdo  that the good
lordshipshowsup. Here suchangularl ord and sucht rinal lord
by mererelations (as per verses ll and 12) do not become
Yogakarakao r statusm akers.

rqw*ngal rfq qer(qFmqrqalr 
diriqFtrfr qsal eftliri arlrql uptl

\
16. RAHU & KETU : Rahuand Kctu give predominently

the effectsasd ue to their conjunction with a house lord or as
duc to the houset hey occupy.

Notes : As alreadys tated,Rahu owns Aquariusa nd Ketu
Scorpio. Still they do not havea  dispositiono f their own in
the matterof giving particulare fferts. (ln poiut of fact, these
ownershipsa re for calculationo f someo f 'Jaimni' dasase tc.a nd
not in a commonc ontext.) Inasmucha s they do not have a
signof their own, they havea lsonot beens pecificallyc lassified
as malefico r beneficf or the variousa scendantass  could be seen
from the rules enunciatedb y sage Parasarain  the current
chapter. Hencci t is suggestetdh at the results to be given by
Rahua nd Ketu will dcpendo n theira ssociatiown ith otherl ords
and occupationo f houses. So to say,i f thcy are relatedt o good
lords they will revealeffectsf avourablet o the native, otherwise
not, Alternativelyt hey should be in favourable housesl ike
angle,t rine etc. so that good effcctsf ollow their position.

qfc *i fe6'lui rlr Frqilat ael*El r
ariaraaiunqfr laal .TTq lqnRrl utstl

17. If a node is in an anglei n aspecto  or associationw irh
a trinal lord or be in a trine in similarr elation with an angular
lord it will becomeY ogakaraka.

Notes : Two important positions are indicatedf or a node
becomingY ogakarakaf or a native. It should be in an anglei n
relation to a trinal lord or be in a trine in aspectt o an angular



Chapter t4 347

lord. In such a situation Rahu or Ketu will become a
Yogakaraka

q'fffiettri scftr€q d uqr *rrw(fir: I
t ttsgxrcr: dar: gtat EE+ gi ! rrle rr

18. O Sage,p leasen arratea ccordingt o the signs rising
to which planet is a yogakaraka nd which is inauspicious.

qqr $e iqqr fqs ! a*argtuf {* r
q?ti{cisfq {g* s*qrsqrq-qrr ||  t etI 
ffEqlrqfqilr: rTrrrr{:q r garaermr* 

{r{ qlqqtiq sqiqfd-Eflqql: uRo rr
qnaiutq q'fqTq qsoqt& fqfiqilq r
{{: flellfqqeil Tql;qp$'iiq qfa1: .eqtl
qr€nlqlsfq Qqrt uig: qr[Tt} ?E: I
iqq.q)(qqrid sd iid faqlaq ! rrRRn

19-22.P LANETS & ARIES ASCENDANT : O Brahmin,
listent o thesewith examples. Even though Mars is the lord of
the 8th, be will be helplul to (other)a uspiciousp lanets. Saturn,
Mercury and Venus are malefics. Auspiciousa re Jupiter and
the Sun. The merec onjunctiono f Saturna nd Jupiter will not
producea uspiciouse ffects( althought hey own a trine and angle).
If Jupiter is at the disposaol f a malefic, he will surely give
inauspiciousresults. Venusi s a direct (or independent)k iller.
saturn etc. will also inflict deathi f associatedw ith an adVerse
planet( i.e. Venus). That is how the effectsw iil be derived by
an Aries native.

Notes:  For Aries ascendanMt ars is the ruler of the lst and
the 8th. The ascendanits  his Mooratrikona sign while the gth
is,hiss econdarys ign. He will hencepredominanllyb c favourable
He cannotbe independentlay uspiciousb ut canh etpa notherf avo-
urablep lanetl ike the Sun or Jupiter or event he Moon through
wbgT he will revealh is goodq uarities. It is atson ot illogicario
concludet hat if Mars is well relatedt o Jupitero r the Sun or the
Moon and is in good bhavas, favourable effects will come
throughh im.



348 Brihat parasaral Iora Sastra

As rcgardso ther unsullied beneficp lanetsf or this ascendant
we haveo nly two. These are Jupiter and the Sun. Even if
Jupiter is capturedb y anothera dversaryh, is gocidr esultsw ill be
stalled. Saturn,M ercury and Vcnusa rem aleficsa nd will cause
harm. Venuswill provea  killer as he is the 2nd and 7th lord.
Saturn and Mercury will also inflict deathi f relatedt o Venus.
The Moon's role is not discussedb y the sage. The Moon will
give mixed results according to associatione tc. as she is an
angularr uler.

An associationbetween Jupiter-Sun, Jupiter-Mars or
Mars-Sunwilt be highly favourablefo r the ascendanitn  question.
Jupiter-Saturna ssociationw ill not provet o be helpful although
they own the 9th and t0th. It is becauseS, aturni s llth lo;d
with primc emphasiso n his Aquariuso wneruhip.

dtag*;aa: qnr: {q} qrf{FEqrsrrl 
Trqqlqm(: *Rlurraetllr$ra: uR I tl
dtqrEql gffi{qrfq qFa qT($'etqTuIn: 

Tqqr;rJlqq$i?i sar;(?rfr rtRfwu: lvtl
23-24.F OR TAURAS ASCENDANT : Jupiter, Venus

and the Moon are malefics. Saturna nd the Sun are auspicious.
Saturn will causeRajayoga. Mercury is somewhaat uspicious,
Jupiter etc.and Mars will inflict death. Theseh ints are for a
Taurusn ative.

Notes : Jupiteri s a maleficf or Taurusa scendauat nd will
avail of the first opportunity to inflict harm as he ownst he gth
and llth housesb oth of which are evil. He is the first-rate
adversary. The Moon being the 3rd lord is not auspicious.
Venus is also classifiedhere as an evil planeta nd a maraka
planet, The words ,,frqtEq]" (Jeevadayo)i ndicate the Jupiter
group, i.e. Jupiter, the Moon and Venus. Accordingt o the
following words of Susloka Sataka- qq1 sE.T*s) ;f qqqlfq il
*vrrrq-for Scorpio ascendantt here is no blemish (to ivlars)o f
the 6th lordship and also for Taurus ascendant( in the caseof
Venus). Sale Parasara apparently took into serious consi-
deration the 6th lordship (Moolatrikona) of Venusa nd calssified
him as an adversary. Though there are some more exponents
to favour Susloka Sataka's line of thinking, Parasarab einga n



Chapter 34 g4g

undisputed authority should be givenm ore weight. The Sun
and Saturna re beriefics. Saturn owns thc bcst trine and best
anglea nd henceh c will bestorvk ingly statuso n the native. The

. Sun though a maiefic by virtue of owning an anglep roves
auspicious. The rule that a malefic owning an angles hould
own a trine also,s o that he becomesa  Yogakaraka( vide sloka
14 supra) is naturally not applicablc to the luminaries as
they own only one signe ach. As regardst he role of Mercury,

. he is only of mixed nature for Taurus ascendanat nd he is not
an excellent benefic by virtue of orvning a Maraka house in
addition to a trine. The 5th is his Mqolatrikonaa nd exaltation
sign, If Mercuryj oins Saturn/Sunh, e will act more effectively.

Mars is classifieda s a killer apart from Jupiter,V enusa nd
the L{oon. Mars is a killer for he owns the 7th and l2th. The
role of Jupiter and Venus as killers is also understandable.
Though the Moon is said to be a killer, she cannot inde-

. pendentlyd o so for shei s only the 3rd lord which is the least
maleficamong 3rd, 6th and I lth. The luminariesa re considered
not inauspiciouse ven by ownership of the 8th house;a s such
the 3rd house lordshsp of the Moon in the caseo f Taurusb e
lenientlyv iewedf rom the point of wiew of inflictingd eath. Her
connectionsw ith Jupiter, or Mars can empower her to inflict
deatho n the Taurusnative.

qlqt'tqT\urr: enn: gfi gq rfq: {c: r
rnlmiq dtq€a qhl tqq* wrr uR{tr
{Rfr gufa6arse} ur{aafq q$Fi[:r 
aEar<\r<rizi sqTqq||q {fci: rr?qrr

25-26. FOR GEMINI ASCENDANI : Mars, Jupiter and
the Sun are malefics while Venusi s the only auspiciousplanet.
The conjunction of Jupiter and saturn is similar to that for
Aries ascendant. The Moon is the prime killer, but it is
dependanto n her association. Thus have beene xplainedb y
the scholarst he effectsf or Gemini ascendant.

Notes : The three planets,v iz. Jupiter, the Sun and Mars
are adversefo r Gemini ascendant. There is no hint on saturn's
role exceptt hat Saturn-Jupitecr onjunctiond oesn ot yield a yoga
just as it does not do so for an Aries native. saturn o*ni tf,e



350 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

8th and the 9th while the 9th is his Moolatrikona. Jupitero wns
thc 7th and l0th. It is my personalf eeling that an exchange
between Saturn and Jupiter in the 9th and l0th or their place-
ment in conjunction in the 9th/lOth, or Saturni n the 9th as
Jupiter is in the l0 will provea  very favourablep oint. (This
line of thinking cannot be extendedt o Aries ascenclanit.,e .
exchangeb etween 9th and l0th lords&  C for Jupiterwill be
in fall in the l0th in a key house.)

For Gemini ascendantM, ars ownst wo evil housest,he 6th
end llth and hencg he is a malefic. The Sun owningt he 3rd
will not be helpful.

Venus, the lord of the 5th and l2th, is declaredto be
higt ly favourable, as the 5th is his Moolatrikona. In view of
the friendship between Venus and Mercury, the l2th lordship
of Venus is not seriously considereda dverse. On the same
lines,Mercury for Libra ascendanti s consideredf avourable
although he owns the l2th, which is his Moolatrikonaa nd
exaltation-thus a predominant house.

rrni?ggdl qrql qqteh<a: lt$r: I
gutalnm: qwrdqql riqf,qE: ilRetl
fr6nrsriqalsdq wE<atq $TTNEI: 
neivrr@adid wi qlfti qdtfqfq: uRqtl

27-28. CANCER ASCENDANT : Venus and Mercury
are maleficsM, ars, Jupiter and the Moon are auspiciousM. ars
is capableo f conferringa  full-fledgedy ogaa nd giving auspicious
effects. Saturn and the Sun are killers and give effectsa ccording
to association. . Thesea re Cancera scendant'se ffects.

Notes : The role of the Sun is comparedt o that of Saturn
as a killer. The Sun is the lord of tbe 2nd and Saturnr ulest he
7th and 8th for Cancer ascendant. Both the housesof Saturn
are inauspiciousa nd henceh e is classifieda s a killer. However,
they are not independently capable of doing bad or good but
act as per their relationshipw ith others.

Venus is inauspicious by virtue of angular lordship
(4th house-Moolatrikona) and the llth lordship. (The llth
lord for a movables ign is a malefic, i.e. Saturn for Aries,
Venus for Cancer, the Sun for Libra and Mars for Capricorn



Chapter 34 351

ascendants.)Thus Venus gets a dual role to do evil lor a
Cancer native. The 3rd and l2th lordship of Mercury will
inflict harm and henceh e is inauspicious.

The best planet for this ascendanits  Mars as he ownsa 
trine as well as an angle. The l0th lordshipw ill prevailm uch
more favourably as the l0th is the best of the 4 anglesand
Aries is the Moolatrikona sign of Mars. The other two
favourable planets are Jupiter and the Moon. Jupiter is the
lord of the 6th and 9th. Though 6th is his Moolatrikona,t he
sageh asg iven preferencet o the 9th lordship for obviouslyt wo
reasons:  firstly the 9th is besto f the two trinesa nd Jupiteri s
a close friend of the Moon, the ascendantl ord. The 3rd
favourablep lanet is the Moon who is the ascendanltord. The
order of preferenceis  Mars, Jupiterand the lvloon,i .e. benefic
tendencyw ill descendf rom one to another and hencet he Moon
is the leastbenefic. If Mars is well relatedt o Jupiter,t he Moon
or to the Sun, he can do wondersf or a Cancernative. The best
place as far as Saturn is concernedi s Capricorn in the company
of Mars or the Moon.

glnrnrnicr: qrn: gteq61, {rrrrrrgrI: 
wislqqdq r q{ $wlrfl: nRQ.tl
lrr(fiql {tfrrq?a: sr{qqtE I6FTTTEI : 

feqeQ sqTil€rs d id RrRrei"rrlorr
29-30. LEO ASCENDAI{I .. Mercury, Venusa nd Saturn

are malefics.A uspicious effectsw ill be givin by Mars, Jupiter
andthe Sun. The conjunctiono fJupiterand Venus(though
Kendra Kona lords) will not produce auspiciousre sults.S aturn
and the Moon are killers who will give effectsa ccording to
sssociation. These are the effectsa pplicablet o Leo ascendant.

Notes : Just as the Sun is noted as a killer for Cancer
ascendant,t he Moon is similarly classifieda s a killer for Leo
ascendanat s shei s the lord of the l2th house. This killer-role
has not barred the Moon from becominga  Yogakarakao r an
auspiciousp lanet for Leo ascendant as per our experience.
Saturn's adverse role is becauseo f two plime reasons*firstly
he is a sworn enemy of the ascendantlo rd and secondlyh e is the
7th lord apart from being the 6th lord. Mercury's rolc is



352 Brihat parosara Hora Sasfta
equallyo minousa s the 2nda nd l2th comeu nderh isr egentT. he
3rd and lOth lordship (a bad housea nd an angler espectively)
makesV enusu nreliable.

Mars is again the bestp ranetf or Leo ascendanfto ilowed
by favourablero lest o.b e enactedb y Jupiter and the sun. Mars
rules the 4th and 9th; Jupiter the 5th and gth and the Sun
ascendant. Here again,t he Sun is the 3rd in ordcr.

gcrsilftErE:q rqT: irr[-v|st qwrq€l I
qrd+gqilAE qfui qlqm'rtst'tr ltrl
qnfi]sfq fifr:, ari;

\*a ' RT{q{sqsE: I
m;qrf,ril(qdrt{ sirrqqTfil qRtw: ulRtl

31-32. VIRGO ASCENDANT.. Mars, Jupiter and the
Moon are malefics while Mercury and Venusa re auspiciorrs.
The conjunction of Venus and Mercury will producey oga.
Venus is a killer as well. The Sun,sr ole will dependo n [i,
association. Thesee ffectsa re for Virgo ascendant..

Notes : Mercury ruling the ascendanat nd the l0th house
and Venus lording over the 2nd and 9th are classifieda s
favourableplanets. venus by virtue of owningt he 2nd wilr
act as a killer also. (Mars ruling the gth can arsoa "t ar killer.)
Jupiterr ulest wo angres-the4 th and the 7th-while th"e  Moon
is the llth lord. For these reasons.t heset wo are considered
inauspicious. The Sun will be good if he joins good planets
in goodb ousesf,o r example in the l0th along *ith tut.r"ury.
There is no hint in the text aboutS aturn'sr ole. By virtue of
the 5th lordshipa nd good relationshipw ith the ascendanlto rd
Mercury, he will prove auspicious, But the staind ue to 6th
Iordshipw ill causea  changei n his dispositiona nd he cannotb e
counteda s an invariable dependent.

*t*qgar: qrqr: wirErgul {ql I
q?tfirilt  (qlEqr*ErrRqTr4 t6f',rrc(tFfll q?Fftqfll illltl
3;vl Fr{Fa dtsur: qTqrq rmqair: r
qs: {tlt: sFTni?i fari{fq ge\ri llvtl

33-34. LIBRA ASCENDANT : Jupiter, the Sun and
Mars are malefics. Auspicious are Saturn and Mercury. The



Chapter 34 3s3

Moon and Mercury will cause Rajayoga. Mars is a killer.
Jupiter and other malefics will also acquirea ' dispositiont o
inflict death. Venusi s neutral. Thus shouldbe known about
Libra ascendant.

Notes : Although Venusi s the ruler of the asiendant,h e
owns 8th as well, and hence the sage term him as neutral,
Dire malefic is Jupiter, the lord of the 3rd and the 6th. The
ruler of the 2nd aud the 7th, Mars, is equally inauspicious
while the Sun ruling the I lth "vill act as an obstructingf orce.
Theset hree planets, viz. Jupiter, Mars and the Sun are morc
malefici f mutually relatedb ut unrglatedt o Saturn,M ercury or
the Moon. On the other hand, Mars or the Suo will act as
primary beneficsif  they join Saturn,Mercury or Venusaccording
to one schoolo f thought.

fqilimqq: qtttT: {ql gtffi t
sqtffrrrfiie qiili qlqrr<t} ni{tr
:rat: qq: fqililwq qrqr ficF'FtHlK: I
qii qd tt fqiiri gRqrkawn: ttQqrl

35-36.F OR SCORPIO ASCENDANI .' Venus,Mercury
and Saturna re malefics.Jupiter and the Moon are auspicious.
The Sun as well ast he Moon areY ogakarakas. Mars is neutral.
Venusa nd other maleficsa cquiret he quality of causingd€ath.
Thesea re for a Scorpionative.

Notes : Just as Venus is a neutral planet for Libra
ascending,M ars is alson eutralf or Scorpioa scendant. Mars
bwnst he ascendantand the 6th, the latter beingh is Moolatri-
kona. The Sun (lord of the l0th) and the Moon (lord of the
9th) are termed the besty ogakarakas. Jupiter though ruling
the 2nd (andt he 5th), is auspicioujsu st as Mercuryf or Taurus
ascendantr uling the 2nd and the 5th. (of courseMercury's
Moolatrikona is the 5th ) Venus, Saturn and Melcury are
malefics as well as death'dealjng planets. Saturn can be
practicallya uspiciousif  he is in the 5th/9th, beingl ord of an
engle, from the point of view of status,f inancee tc.

9t6 g€r tfq: nq: q|ql q'ffi<qr6,t t
frnl ggm<drqllqi faqm $TrtsqriqEllT le: ll



3s4 Eriliat ParasaraH ora Sastra
ge: €TttFFt: @tfflt qn) mrmvawr: 
undnlqxadd sti iir{ fqqf{qilr u!ctl

37-38 SAGITTARIUS ASCENDANT.. Only Venus is
inauspicious. Mars and the Sun are auspicious.T he Suna nd
Mercury are capableo f conferring  u yo[u Saturni s a killer.
Jupiteri s neutral. venus acquiresk ilring powers. 'fhese 

effects
are for Sagittariusa scendant.

Notes : Venus is a first-rate malefic for Sagittarius
ascendanta s he owns the 6th and llth. The sageh ints that
none is akin to venus in giving marefice ffectsf or this ascendant.
S-aturni s straightawaya  killer, ruling the 2nd and the 3rd.
Venusc an also becomea  killer (if relatedt o Saturn). Though
Mercury rules two angres-the 7th and rOth-he-is decrarid
auspicious whereasf or virgo ascendanta s welr as Gemini
ascendant,J upiter is consideredi nauspicious. This supreme
role of Mercury is possiblyb ecauseo f his ownershipo f th; lOth
house( moolatrikonaa nd hence predominant against7 th house
ownership)w hereasJ upiter doesn ot own Moolatrikonai dentical
with the l0th house:best of the angles_for an ascendanrtu led
by Mercury. If the Sun (ruler of ihe 9th) joins Vf"r.ury, Uotn
of them will confer stil superiory oga for sagittariusn atives.
Mars gives primarily -(mootatrrllnaj

his 5th house effects 
sheddingh is l2th lordship and hencei s a favourablep lanet.
Jupiter is neither a first-rate beneficn or an adversaryf or he
own-s-t he 4th (angular lordships  blemish). The Moon rufing
the 8th cannot be a powerful yogakaraka unlessw ell-retateJ
to Mercury, the Sun or Mars. An associationb etweent he
Moon and Jupiter can confer a yoga par excellence.. 

qwdtiaq: {Frr: qqr qniqq;Eq}r 
*T,*O r cnt ?qq gfia qFrr:3iErliri4lle: tl
Rri, sqqq: l}qil: rkir: qqlqEEl 
ryrerallraeftf qqrqqrfn'qRfq, uyotl

39-40. CAPRICORN ASCENDANT.. Mars, Jupiter 
the and

Moon are malefics,V enus and Mercury are 
Saturn auspicious.

w ill not be a killer of his own. Mars and other malefics
will inflict death. The Sun is neutral. Only Venus is capable



Clupter 34 355
of causinga  superior yoga. Thesc are the effectsa pplicableto 
Capricorna scendant.

Notes : The sage has listedM ars in the first placew hile
mentioninga dversep lanetsf or Capricorna scendanats  Mars rules
the 4th and llth. Jupiteri s lord of the2nda nd l2th, ths latter
being his important house. The Zth lord Moon is not quite a
favourableplanet.

Saturna nd the Sun are neither very favourablen or very
adverse. Saturn will rweal killing powersi f he joins fupitei
Mars or the Moon. 

'auspicious While Venus and Mercury Uoi-f,
i n their own way, the former is the bestyo"gra" karaka

for this ascendantf,o r he is the lord of the 5th and l0th.

*<-aea-gvr: rtF[I: qrqqfiqql qtt I
t{tIqaqrlqFt"tr6"(t iflittq: : r6ftrtitq, lFqfa: ||vttl
qfr rlwra q{Rt ga} rwav: Tftr:I 
grr*r\waeriri sqTqqnfn {Rfu: nvltl

,4142. A/UARIUS ASCENDANT ..Jupiter, the Moon
and Mars are malefics while Venusa nd Satuin are auspicious.
Ve11s_is  the only Rajayogac ausing planet. Jupiter, ihc Suo
and Mars are killers. Mercuryg ivesm eddtinge ftlcts. These
effectsa re describedb y tbe teainJa for Aquarius ascendant.

Notes: The 2nd and l l th lordJupiter isadiremalef ic
followed by the Moon (the 6th lord) and Mars (ruringt he 3rd
and l0th). while venus and saturn are both auspi-cioufso r
Aquarius ascendant, Venus is the only planet thai can be
consideredt o have beenv estedw ith powers of Rajayoga. Saturn
isnot comparedt o venus as he ownst he r2th iititur-n"oeourry.
venus is the rord of the 4th and the gth. As the gth is the best
trine, he is relievedo f blemish due to angularl ordship. The
Sun is termed as a killer as he rules the ith, a marakah ouse.
(Saturnp laysa  similar rol€ for Leo ascendanot wning the ?th
in Moolatrikona). Jupiterr uring the 2nd and Mars orining the
3rd are also killers. out of tbe 3 kilrers, Mars is the la'sti n
order. A strong relationship betweentw o or all of theset hree
killers will affect the rongevity to declines everely. Mercury
ruling the sth and the gth will give mixed results. If Mercury
joins an adversep lanet, he wili be essentiailay dversew hile in



356 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra
joining Venuso r Saturn,h e can considerabliym prove. Alonc
in bad houses,h e will be evira nd in good housesh e wil be
favourable. This is how Mercury'sr ole for tbisa scendannte ed
be undcrstood.

r<qr@w: qFr *rfeq g* r
qalq1go qlq{rcl iT it{" nytn
qRrlsfr i {frrsrl w;eilln tll qdf t
dtav,itqrqrdd s-drfil qtifqratEu vvtl

43-44. PISCES ASCENDANT.. Saturn, Venus,t he Sun
and Mercury are malefics. Mars and the Moon are auspicious.
Mars and Jupiter will causeI yoga. Though Mars is u kitt"r,
he will not kill the native-( independentry). saturn and Mercury
are killers. Thus should be judged .the effects for a pisces
native.

Notes : saturn ownst wo evir housesf or piscesa scendant.
Hence he will reveal himserf most awefuly. venus rules thc
3rd and 8th--again two evil houses. And hence he is not a
favourable plariet. The sun ruling the 6th will prove adverse
though he has good termsw ith the lord of the ascendantJ, upiter
Mars is the lord of the 2nd (Mooratrikona) and the 9th (the
besto f the trines). Inspite of owning a killer-irouse,t re has bleir
specifically erempt from acting as a kilter independentlya nd
placed in the yogakaraka list. To be a killer, Mars must be
instigatedb y anotherk iller. viz. saturn or Mercury. Jupiter is
I very favourable planet (of course next to t"turr) o*oiog tn"
ascendanat nd the l0th. Though there is no specific meition
of venu becominga  killer in suchr ote can be sein in him as he
owns the 8th house.

q{ qllrrfqqiia qFqiTrfi{rTfEQ I
{qiqqllrr€ q qqrori fanf<a1||v{tl
wqrdfq gr*rq annnr{\ fqf*eq * r
tQat iT q.,c ilid sqqqrfu a am6q lvqtl

45-46. GENERAL .. Thus the auspiciousa nd inauspicious
effects derivable through the planets du. to their lordships
according to the rising sign be estimate,J. Apart, the effects



Chapter 35 35?

duc to Nabhasa yogas ctc, be atso known which I natrate as
under.

Notes: The good disposition, bad dispositiona nd killing
powers of the various pl4pets are assigned by the sageon a
particular understandingo f lordships etc. for each of the 12
asccndants.From the current two verses,we take an important
clue about the final role of a planet. To wit, if a planet is
constituent of a favourabtey oga, like, say, Daamini Yoga (one
.o f the Nabhasa Yogas), his original malefic tendencyo f being
an adversep lanet for a particular ascendant,he will give ihe
cftectso f Daamini yoga and thus will becomea  Rajayogakaraka.
Conversely,a lthough a planet assumesg oodr ole by lordship,
if he is involvedi n a bad yoga,l ike, say, Sarpay oga(one ofthc
Nabhasay ogasa gain) there will only be adverser esultsa nd not
favourable results due to lordship. These causesshould be
properly estimated and effects denoted suitably. A killer is a
killer irrespectiveof his havi'ng becomea  Rajayogakarakao r so.
Killer and Yogakaraka should not be mixed togetheri n respect
of ono and the samep lanet.

et{r ilqqqtqp{rq: il ?tl I
Chapler 35

Nabhasa Yogas
qqffl iffifi qlqr: $sq;t faq(f,q I r
urkvtE mr*ecg {rdEilcanrftFqilr:r lrr
3m[qTaqrf"qf]r q EiTiii Er{ irr: I
fiFfrfq{rfr: {qr: sre drn: qdtfilm:r rRrr

l-2. O excellento f the Brahmins, explainedb elow are 32
Nabhasay ogas which have a total of 1800d ifrerentv arieties.
Thesec onsisto f 3 Asraya yogas, 2 Dala,y ogas,2 0 Akriti yogas,
and 7 Sankhyay ogas.



3.sg Brihat Parasaral lora Sastra
Notes : No additional notes and explanations are being

giveni n the presentv olumeo n the following chapters: 
.Nabhasay ogas( ch, 35)
Lunar yogas( ch. 37)
Solary ogas( ch. 38)
fhese haveb een fully discusseda nd annotatedin  a cleal

tnanner in my English translationso f Saravalia nd Horasara.
The readerm ay refer to the saidw orks.

lattqq g€6|{tq rqdiqtglrtr(aq: I
rnFtr(q: q,iiaqq qqqlql s61fdil rrtil
qqRq: nr6ERrnq rysrafi-r {qq} |
QqqqqrrGiq Tqd qrfq{qsl rrvrr
tr-rtfm-eos-rthnr-qa-rq"-utfq g I
qqq?rffl qii q sga{iff, flrnfa:r rtrr
dtqrcm-q:dcrdt-ilq-qrur+{r{-rrc[fir: I
gfi ilaw e.itii grar q?efrriilf 6u ! rrqrr

.. 3.6. NAMES OF NABIIASA YOGAS .. Asraya yogasa re
Rajju, Musala and Nala yogas. Dala yogas are Maala
and Sarpa. The twenty Akriti yogas are : Geda, Sakata,
SringatakaV, ihanga, Hala, Vajra,Yava,K amala,V aapi,y upa,
Sara, Sakthi, Danda, Nauka, Koota, Chatra, Dhanushi {or
Chapa),ArdhachandraC, hakra and Samudray ogas. The seven
Sankhya yogas are Vallaki, Daama, paasa, Kedara, Sooia,
Yugaand Gola yogas. Thus theseare32 in total.

(ffi fhrfr <cE:f cwdiev: TrTrl:' 
iriTrrrl G3flnqFtTrsrllRfi $ rlar: rrurr

7. RAJJU, MaSALA AND NALA YOGAS .. Atl the
planetsi n movable signs cause Rajju yoga. All the planetsi n
fixed signs cause Musala yoga. All the planetsi n dual signs
causeN ala yoga.

hErrqqt: gfri: qrqqt eq{adt I
dqrrlTlFtrtdqTcql lltil{T$tq,qqe} trctt



Chapter 35 3s9

8. MAALA AND SARPA YOGAS: If 3 angles are
occupiedb y benefics Maala yoga is producedw hile maleficss o
placedw ill causeB hujangao r Sarpay oga' Thesey ogasr espect-
ively producebenefica nd maleficr esults.

Enq?q*'traqri: q{qTq} qEr6q: t
{tfie ff;rsTErrTli: (.trr$irur: (Tt: llell
qlq: ,U$'res ilq qrqtiqqilt:ftri: I
srq €qFTqf a+lqrt: qqfrql qefrr* llloll
qr;tqpnRqi; qffi: qlqT€i:e rsugiftut: r
qlq] qvnfqu: clsa: dtc0aftqifa: tt1ltt

).11. GADA, SAKATA, YIHAGA, SRINGATAKA,HALA,
YAJRAA NDYAVA YOGAS.' If all the planetso ccupy two
successivaen gles,Gada yoga is formed. Sakata yoga occurs
whena ll the planets are disposedin  the ascendanatn d the ?th
house. If all confinet o the 4th and the l0th, then Vihagay oga
occurs. All planets in the ascendant, 5th and 9th sause
Sringatakay oga while all planetsa re in the 2nd, 6th and the
l0th or in the 3rd,7th and llth or in the 4th, 8th and l2th
causeH alayoga. Vajra yoga is caused by all benefics in the
ascendanat nd the ?th or all maleficsi n the 4th and l0th. In a
contrarys ituation,i .e. all beneficsin  the 4th and the l0th or all
maleficsin  the ascendanat nd the 7th, Yava yogai s generated'

q?i+arrt: n{ftEr: E',qFttlilf: I
frorwqai: s{frq} eT{t€qr€q: lllRll

12. KAMALA AND VAPI YOGAS : If all the planetsa re
in the 4 angles,K amala yoga is produced. If all of them
be in all the cadent houses or in all the succedenht ousesvapi
yogao ccurs.

{q} qrncqg{c{: ncgdtag{ri: t
nfta{qrcqg{cttoe} qeql€iTgstrt:ll  tlll

13, Y(IPA, SARA, SAKT'HI AND DA.NDA YOGAS : If
all the 7 planetsa re in the 4 housesc ommencingfr om the ascen'
dant they causeY upa yoga. If a similar occupaticnc ommences



360 Brihat ParasaraH ora Sastta

from the 4thhouse Sara yoga, from tbe Zth house Sakthi yoga
and from the lfth house Danda yogaa re formed.

qt<q srcqital Tr qapilqt;q scaf: r
E?Tctt: frcilTra?iil i qeqq {etilri: il?ytl

. 14. NAUKA,KOOTA,CHATRA AND CHA?AyOGAS :
lfall the planetso ccupy the seven houses from the ascendant,
Nauka yog,ao ccurs. Koota yoga, Chatra yoga and Chapa yoga
o6:curr cspectivelyw hen the commencingh ousesa re the 4th, :.th
and l0th. Here again the planets should occupy seven
continuous houses.

qrnltTifi(Fiirq nqnriinngail r
uarf6-a*.q* Tr!f,{:q q€rftli ilt{rr

lS. CHAKRA AND SAMUDRA YOGAS; lf ail the
planets @cupy six alternatives igns commencing from the
escendantC, hakra yoga is formed. Samudrayogai s produced
if theseo ccupys itrilarly six alternatives igns commencingf rom
the 2nd from the ascendant.

gn<rfnfmiqTel gqrqlrl Gq*Rqi: r
qqlg feq,i: slqil: *'arrq qg$,i: ntqtl
rt=T<rf{rrq(i: rrTrtri ilqr@r:w qlqrfai: r
fturTff iqn: s{fr$qrlrgitRilT trt\etl

16-17 SANKHYA YOGAS .. If all planets are in one
rign Gola yoga is formed. Similarly if ail are in 2 signs,y uga
yo88, 3 signsS oola yog,4 signsKedara yoga, 5 signs paasa
Iog& 6 signsD ama yoga and 7 signsV eena yoga is produced.
None of theses eveny ogasw ill be operable, if another Nabhasa
yoga explainede arlier is derivable.

. qEafsqr!:I Gq: l<tntcrrqqqtfial rgvr: r
t(T: arFTT.NIrqI Ts{qrrql: qiil sfqiil: illetl

18. EFFECTS OF NABHASA YOGAS (upto stoka 50)
RA.IIU YOGA.. One born in Rajiu yoga will be fond of wander-
ing, be charming,w ill earn in foreign countries,a nd be cruel
and mischievous.



Chapter3 5 361
'  

qtiilrquildfqaiGl {qfi{: Glril: I
.r6gdTf:iq rfaf,r gftrsgen qlff, ?m:u  tQ.tl

D. MASALA YOGA .' One born in Musala yoga will be
endowedwith bonour, wisdom, wealth etc., be dear to king,
famous,w ill havemany sonsand be firm in disposition.

?qif rR{d+fl qqs=qqqrfrri}sfafrgqnq 1
l;{Qil{q gGqr rqdli qrsgqe uQorl

20. NALA YOGA .' One born in Nala yoga will have
unevenp hysique, be intercstedi n accumulatingmoney, very
skilful, helpful to relativesa, nd charming.

fiid gqirflil qeqqur;iqlTqrq?il 1
r61frrrg qgpil6T qrFnqi strirqal:q J: u1ttl

21. MAALA YOGA .' One born in Maalay oga will be
ever .happy, endowed with conveyances.r obes, food and
pleasuresb,e  splendorousa nd endowedw ith many females.

frqqr: Tqrf i:qr fatri g:arf<crg: +.il{q I
rttrtHwrf?T1iil: qriq|T.tl q{Fil ?r(T: llRRll

22. SARPA YOGA .' One born in Sarpa (Bhujanga) yoga
will be crooked, cruel, poor, miserableand will depend on
othersf or food and drinks.

erfrgwrriqltr qcErt:{ neanlgnrttnqI 
qrl6qsTFrfisqiigrar qFHr rfiilqi !t lrRlrl

23 GADA YOGA .' One born in Gada yoga will always
make efforts to earn wealth, will perform sacrificial rites, be

'skilful in Sastrasa nd songs and endowedwith wealth, gold
and preciouss tones

qlqret:g ncl qcf: uaargciffqaflr :tsl t
fqee{qifrAil: nqi qrfl sqffiar: ttqYtl

24. SAKATA YOGA .' One born in Sakatay oga will be
affiictedb y diseasesw, ill baved iseasedo r ugly nails,b e foolish'



362 Brihat ParasaraH ora Sastra

will live by pulling carts, be poor and devoid of friends and
relatives.

Eqqaqq)ftFcarR il: q<argdtaaH) 6err: 
fierEfqmvqf aerif r6il qlt qar qiar: rr1{rr

25. VIHAGA YOGA .. One born in V haga yoga will be
fond of roaming,be a messengerw, ill live by sexual dealings,
be shamelesasnd interestedin  quarrels.

fitoc6t: TrqqRQgI:f crl1lt: fiar: {srrr6t"r:I 
qlcql gafadcar: }Eg,r{fi€lqql qgsrT:i lRqtl

26. SRINGATAKA YOGA .' One born in Sringarakay oga
will be fond of quarrels and battles, be happy, deart o king,
endowedw ith an auspiciousw ife, be rich and will hatew omen.

a6rfnt} EfqFTfd: tqil g:fcatm q'ldqrt 
e;ug€Rq:i qiilr: iaat,E eiilt €Erg aqr:u Rell

27. I'IALA YOGA .' One born in Hala yr'rgaw ill eat a lot,
be very poor, be a farmer, be miserablea, gitated, given up by
friendsand rclativesa nd be a seryant.

ETfwaqq:gfwrr: (: llqrrr filtgnq: r
glrqfqqfq qcl' ctrfir: qil ffiaT{q illct l

28. VAJRA YOGA.' One born in Vajra yoga will be
happy in the beginning and at theend of life, be valorous,
charming,d evoido f desiresa nd fortunesa nd be inimical.

ffif{qqqqfrTtr Tqql qui qtlrfutr5r I
itrirT(: Mqnr qsqlqqqt: siil gaqlj uRerl

29. YAVA YOGA .' Onc born in Yava yoga will observe
fastsa nd other religious rules, will do auspiciousacts, will
obtain happinessw, ealthand sonsi n his mid-life, be charitable
and firm.

fqqlgurrdqgr:a qr:R urrgu)fe gedlfuq al; I
q*t{ri$fl: luatnr: t6t1?Nfqt:T f1qql fteqq llloll



Chapter3 5 363

30. KAMALA YOGA .' One born in Kamalay ogaw ill be
rich and virtuous,be long-lived,very famous,p ure, will perform
hundredso f auspiciousa ctsa nd be a king.

f{fuswi fagorfuaf:iwdgerigtn qilril{it l
;Fr{qcrfrrx€cer qr{tq}iq (rErFtu: l ttl

3t. VAPI YOGA .' Oneb orn in Vapi yogaw iil be capable
of accumulatingrveaith,be endowed with lasting wealth, and
happinessa nd sons,be free from eyea fflictionsa nd be a king.

q1;qfficarfara: fre4| gil.: TriiRTr$q:I 
aafrmwqgsql $ iilral fEf{rGar?u iRtl

32. YUPAYOGA .' One born in Yupa yoga will bave
spiritualk nowledge,be interestedi n sacrificialr ites, endowed'
with a wife, be strong, interestedi n fasts and other religious
observationas nd be distinguished.

EEr$ITI Err$tttf; rlqqruailfqil{q qtmq1 |
fqar: gf,netmru: qnqli TrFGrrn: qq-Au lltl

33. SARA YOGA .' One born in Sata yoga will make
arrows,b e heado f prison,w ill earn through animals, will eat
meata nd indulgei n torture and meanhandiuorks.

uarQakaFrg:fqililqTaedia<rgv: letrl; I
iqrqEfaf{gql: fl{iqi qnrr: Rqri: lrrrqr: n?yrl

34. SAKTHI YOGA .' One born in Sakthi yoga will be
bereft of wealth, be unsuccessful,m iserable, mean, lazy, long-
lived, interesteda nd skilful in war, firm and auspicious.

6ag:nrrfa:tlil: ttti? a frqhr: RrctilrEn: I
g:fea{taienr Eosqrrrn qqfe q(r: | l1{rl

35. DANDA YOGA .' One born in Danda yoga will lose
his sonsa nd wife, be indigent, unkind, away from his men,
miserablea nd will servem eanp eople.

<fqqlqdffEfqnrqt:q €HII: qrdsti* BGert: 
sqqil qfqql q6rrr qJgEql.fl:qnTt:g qqr:u lqtl



364 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastia

36. NAAKA YOGA ; One born in Nauka yoga will derive
his livelihood through water, be wealthy, famous. wicked,
wretched,d irty and miserly. 

.

3[i!t6qTq?a?m frfqsqrr: T16r: !$I: I
qaTTgiqfnre ri mFa fifrgrierfeal tgw: 1l\etl

37. KOOTA YOGA .. One born in Koota yoga will be a
liar, will heada  jail, bri poor, crafty, cruel and will live in hills
and fortresses.

?lrlr?n|IrTl Eqt.tr;iIEI{rTetFQ{: lgienfr: t
rqts;rt qqfq i<r: qqdq {tefg<rat{t FnE ule tl

38. CHATRA YOGA .' One born in Chatra yoga will help
his own men,b e kind, dear to manyk ings, very intelligent, be
hapny at the beginninga nd end of his life and be long-lived.

uqftrgtawqnq'ltr: ftmnq eni faqdr:t 
rrtsmn wilr wraftfln: rrr qqlqsln lQ,rl
39. CHAPA YOGA .' One born in Chapa yoga will be a

liar, will protects ecretsb, e a thief, be fond of wanderingi n
forests,be devoidof luck and be happy in the middle of his
life.

Rrmm: s{ fiFnnftqr $fqat qfqi: r
wFomarqaqgmr r{ftt *isdqErr€ lYotl

N. ARDHA CHANDRA YOGA.. Onc born in Ardha
ChandraY oga will lead an army, wilt possessa  splendorous
body, be dear to king. be strong and endowed with gems, gold
ond ornaments.

slrilss:i qr(tfalll -f fiE(it ltnqRi|{lit : I
qqfr ii;* q3qrq'i t qrqi qli i lY t t l

41, CHAKRA YOGA : One born in Chakra yoga will be
an emperorat whosef eet will be the prostrating kings' heads
adoringg em-studdedd iadems.



Chapter'31 365
i|Elinqqqar xlugm qiqilfrqT: qgTr I
EEfirqiqr: grqT:f rq<fqrmr:e rqvitcrivu vRtl
42. SAMUDRA YOGA .. One born in Samudrayoga will

have many preciouss tones and abundant wealth, be-e idowed
with pleasuresd, ear to people, will have firm wealth and be
well-disposed.

fsqritffliqqrsr ftgqr: Sfeqqq ffrffer: I
lerql {ETiqI rftqrqi dlfaar: gaqTn: ylll
4.3 I/EENA YOGA .. One born in Veena yoga wifl be

fond of songs,dancea nd musical instruments,b e skilful, happy,
wealthy and be a leadero f men.

eiFq qwtrwrt aaurgqil) rQlar: eqtr: I
qSW{iiHEd dt* qfia fqairq uvytl

44, DAAMINI YOGA.. One born in Daaminiyoga will be
helpful to others, will have righteously earned wealth, be very
affiuent, famous, will have many sons and gems, be courageous
and red-lettered.

q1fr 6qqqv: tfil{ eqt: trpq6r<ng I
qnrfwql fq{itqr E6TFqr! wqemnq uy{tl

45. PASA YOGA .. One born in pasay ogaw ill be liabte
to be imprisoned,b e skilful in work, be deceivingin  disposition,
will talk much, be berefto f good qualitiesa nO witt have manv
Servants.

tqpTgqqlqr: E;dtETF[q: iqqrfaq: gfwr: I
tari rTr{in€Fr€qfiar uiliwr: uvqtl

. 46. KEDARA YOGA .. One born in Kedara yoga will be
usefult o many, be an agriculturist,b e truthful, huppy, fickle-
mindeda nd wealthy.

fievneruqtar f(qTr {qflqs5ilr qQTrTqIr: 
dqT* ilcqqw qt qli $rsFa ?trr:l tyetr



366 Brihat ParasaraEora Sastra

47, SOOLA YOGA .. One born in Soola yoga wilt be
sharp, indolent, bereft of wealth, be torturous, prohibited,
valiant,a nd famoust brough war.

qrqcs{rfEq}qr ur(|Ear er aQugrr v}* r
. F

qffir{u{(Qilr g.rdn t ril irnil: uvqtl
48. YUGA YOGA .' One born in Yuga yoga will be

heretic,be devoidof wcalth, be discardedb y others, and be
devoido f sons,m othera nd virtues.

wigmr fquat fqurfqilcqflqilr qfeqt r
ftd g:fcr0n {r}A qlTr qEfiil n<t:n Yerl

49. GOLA YOGA .' Oneborn in Gola yogaw ill be strong,
be devoido f wealth,l earningand intelligenceb, e dirty, sorrow-
ful and miserable.

qqkqfr {ffi{ae $q{|fri: t
sfqnfqfr fHqt: i lqTqErt!l l{olt

' 50. Ancestors ayt hat the resultsd ue to the said( Nabhasa)
yogasw ill be felt throughout,i n all the Dasap eriods.

fefqtrqlrTrsqrcil rQ q  tl 
Chapter 36

Many Other Yogas
qA nqq* qlq: qsl: trg*svrvr t

9 !

azFrcqT{:I$I: qrQa: crqlrftnwwrl rrlrr
I

{qd.Rw} qrq't svdtegwaGqar : 
qtqqlqlE$r{: srit rrmfiqt qil{igq nRtl

l-2. BENEFIC & MALEFIC YOGAS. . If there be a benefic
in the ascendantS, ubhayogai s producedw hile a malefict herein



Chapter 36 367
erusesAsubhay oga. similarly beneficsin  both the l2th and the
2nd causeS ubhay oga. Mareficsin  both the r2tlr and the 2nJ
also cause Asubha yoga. One born in Subha yoga wiil be
eloquent,c harminga nd virtuous whire his counterp-ar*ti lr u"
sensuousw, ill do sinful acts and will enjoy (or swall,owo) thers,
wealth.

Notes : Subhay ogai s of two kinds. It canb e formed by
a singleb enefici n the. ascendant. It can arsou e rormeo by-a
benefici n the 2nd and by another simurtancousriyn  tne ritrr.
obviously the latter subhay oga is still superior. (Needlesst o
mentiont bat if the ascendant2; nd and r2th are ,simurtaneously
occupiedb y 3 beneficse, vent hen Subha yoga of u u.ry gr.ui
order is established.)T his yogag ivesp hysicarb eauty, exce'itent
virtues and eloquent disposition. Though the teit does not
mention, additional 

f _effect1s,! : a happy life, health, wealth,
longevity, amee 

 
tc Thesea dditionale ffectsw ill not rurrv .uiuri

by a single ordinary benefic in the ascendant.
A malefic or malefics in these pl{ces will produce

AsubhaYoga or inauspiciousy oga. Each yogai s ln.r.uriini"
malefic. As a result,t hc subjectw iil be lipldinous, will indrilge
in unethical and sinful deedsa nd be 6apableo f bracketin-g
others' possessionsW. hile a single malefic may not give sJ
bad results,t wo or three in suchp ositionsw ilr indeedp ioduce
most unfavourabler esults,a part from affectingh ealth, longevity
etc. adversely.

Needlessto  mention that in analysingt he results due to
good or bad combinationso, ne shouldt ake the planet's dignity,
strength, relations with other planets and m"ny ru"tr ottrer
factors into consideration. A mareficy oga can be nuilified by
other compensatingf actors while a good yoga may not be
productiveo fexpectedg ood results when involved in adverse
circumstances.F or example,a ssume that for an Aquarius
Mercuryi s in the 2nd housew hile Jupiteri s in the l2th house.I t
will be detrimentalt o rush to the conclusiont hat the ascendant
is surroundedb y two beneficsa, nd that subha yoga results will
improvet he native. Conversely,t his is worse than a typical
AsubhaY oga.

Again take Asubha yoga. Assume Virgo rises .while
saturn is in exaltationi n the 2nd and the Sun is in Leo in the



368 Etihat Parasara Hora Sastra

lzth. This needn ot bc dubbed as Asubha Yoga' Theset wo
maleficsh avet heir own meritsa nd will prove favourablet o the
native.

This extensionm ay wisely be madef or every yoga-good

or bad-and in every context throughout the analysiso f the
geniture. Only then willan agreeablep icturee merge'

*ri lcgrl wrrrtir?aTalq q1{ge I
dtarrmRlftfli qlq]sd qq*qtt ttltt
{q+sRstqraRwril $IErIl q}E t
tqr{t gqsrqail trqfsqfi'* a{: llYll

3-4. GAJAKESARI YOGA .' Shoutd Jupiter be in an
anglef rom the ascendanot r from the Moon, and be conjuncto r

by (another) benefic,a voiding at the same time debilit-
a"rtpio'.n.t,. dc ombustiona nd inimical sign,G ajakesariy ogai s caused'
One born in Gaja Kesari yoga will be splendorous,w ealthy'
intelligente ndowedw ith many laudable virtuesa nd will please
the king.

Notes I The Parasari type of Gaja Kesari Yoga is
constructedo n a differentf ooting' That Jupiter-Moon should
be in mutuala nglesi s a normallya cceptedy ogau ndert his name'
In my opinion this kind of angularity cannoty ield supreme
effects.T he caseo f mereo f Jupiterb eing in exaltationi n a lunar
angle can better be known as Pa:rchaM aha PurushaY oga'
spJcificallyH amsa Yoga. In other cas€st he angularity between
tile two needn ot be givent he nameGaja Kesari' In point of
fact, the Moon-Jupiterm utual angular placementi s called as
simply KesariY oga, vide Phala Deepika, Ch' 6, sloka 14 etc'
Thcet rec tsg ivenare : "Thenat ivewi l ldes t roy thebandofh i -9
eneties. fre will be a lofty speakeri n an assemblya nd will
servea  king. He will l'e long lived and famous' He will be
intelligent".

Referringt o JatakaP arijata,t herea re two kinds of Gaja
K e s a r i y o g a s m e n t i o n e d t h e r e i n . T h e f i r s t k i n d i s f o r m e d b y
Jupiterb eing in an anglef rom the Moon' This is the common
lype of vogi. Second alternativei s : The Moon should be
asbectedb y Mercury or Venus or Jupiter while the aspecting
planet is free from debilitation and combustion'



Chapter3 6 369
Kumara Swameeyin a popular Tamit classicn as this yoga

stati'g that the Moon shouldb e increasing( i.e. waxind wbile
Jupiter shouldb e in the 4th or io the l0th from the said Moon.
This comest o pass when a constituent is iu Taurus, pisces,
Aquarius or Sagittarius. To wit, Gaja Kesari yoga is applicable
to only four placements That is, Jupiter shourdb e in Aluarius
while the Moon is in Taurus, or vice versa. Alternativeiy the
Moon shoud be in sagittarius whire Jupiter is in pisces, oi vice
versa. Please note that even cancer is omitted which is
exaltation sign for Jupiter and own sign for the Moon.- In
making such a specific statement, the author of Kumrn
swrmeeyrm must obviousry have possesseda n unporailelcd
authority.

Then we come to the Tamil tranelation of krasara Hora
by C.G. Rajan. His version statest hat the Moon and Jupi-ter
should be in mutual angles, but thc Moon should not Lve
Mercury in the 5th from her, nor should she be in aspectt o
Mercury so that the Yoga obtainedi s not simultaneouslyg ivcn
annulment. Further the Moon should be free fro.. combwbt
and debilitation.

The sanskrit edition of parasaraH ora of sri venkatesu.ra
Press,B ombay,h as it in sucha  manner making it clear that
Vaidyanatha of Jataka par[iata did take these verses from
Parasara. (In fact many of the Raja yogas given in our current
chapter have been used by other workg like phala Deepika,
Kumara SwameeyamS, ata yoga Manjari, Jataka parijata etc)-.
Coming back to Gaja Kesari yoga given by the Bombay series,
we find that the Jupiter-Moon mutual angularity finds place in
the first kind of yoga as given by vaidyanatha white thi second
versionof vaidyanatha occursi n the Bombays eriesi n a different
guise. It is statedt here that Mercury aspecting or joining the
Moon, not placedi n debilitation nor.b eing combust causest hie
yoga. In the secondyoga, Venusa nd Jupiter are not riven any
place.

, However, the two yogasg iven by Vaidyanathaa re exactly
identical with the onesg iven in parasara Hora of rhakur prasad
PustakaB handare dition from Varanasi.

The Chaukambhae dition doesn ot differ from our version.



370 Brlhat Parasara Hora Sastra

Thus; I have placeda ll the different versions of Gaja
Kesari Yoga before the reader. Though the name doesnot
deserve any special considerationa s for Gaja Kesari yoga, I
would give less importance to the mere angular positionso f
Jupitcr-Moon. From otherf ormations,w e may understandth at
Raja Yoga resul8 will prcvaili n tbe following conditions in a
descendiogo rdor.

l. As given in Kumarr Swameeyam.
2. As giveni n Chaukambhae dition and our edition.
3. The secondkind of yoga given by Jataka Parijata.
4. The second kind of yoga given by Bombaye dition of

ParasaraH ora.
But, we do not understandt he basis of C.G. Rajan why

Mercury should not aspectt he Moon or be in the 5th from her.
Contrarily when Jupiter and the MooD are in mutual angles,
Mercury in the 5th from the Moon will be an impetus to
GaF Kcsari rather than becomingan impediment.

Cnja Kesari yoga formed in any of the four manners
tuggcsteda bove will give wcalth, fame etc. in the Dasa periods
of Jupiter, Moon and planetsr elatedt o them. Therc is also a
school of thought that onc born in Kesari yoga will bc rich in
tbe dasao f Vcnus.

rrrtsg.ntlr qrrq tq*rq qt{t r
q dqlswqr;trqt<rqit:f tnrqa-dRnrrt{ rr
<rq{Eq} qqdril (ftn rq$l-r&qf I
rM qqtan g5qlsqatilfrq: uttl

5-6. AMALA YOGA .. If there be exclusivelya benefici n
the l0th from the ascendanot r the Moon, Amalay oga exists.
Amala yoga will confer fame lastingt ill the moon aod starsexist
and will make the native honouredb y the king, enjoy abundant
pleasures,b e charitable; fond of relafives, helpful to others,
pious ano virtuous.

Notes : The l0th house from the Moon or from the
acccndant should coDtain c benefic and be without a malefic
occupation. I{a maleficj oins inthe l0th simultaneously,t he
cficacy of the yoga will be void. A pure Amala Yoga gives
name and fame lasting for dccadesa nd decades. Wealth is not



Chapter3 6 371
indicateda sa resulto f ihe yogab y the sage. phala Deepika
for exampled cnotesw ealthf or this position.

It may be noted for what it is worth that the yogas
mentionedb y Bhavap ositionss houldb e reckonedw ith reference
to Bhava chart while dignity of the participant planets will
dependon their sign position. An example chart for Amala
Yoga is givenb elow whoseo wnerw asb orn on l6th May, 1959
at llgh 29viat26N29 80821.

Mars
27- r7
Ven

r2-57

Asc
6-09

-

Moon
5-29

Rahu
t7-36

This horoscopeo f a femalew asg iven by me in Doctrines
of Suka Nsdi-Retoldo n p. 37 in different context. There is a
clear cut Amala Yoga causedb y Mercury iu the l0th from
ascendant. Note that there is no planet accompanyingM ercury,
nor is therea ny adversea specto n him. Further, there is an
exchangeb etweenMars and Mercury. This augurst he good
effects of the yoga in the matter of wealth. As stated io
Doctrines of Suka Nadi:Retold, the natives tarteda  businessin 
the United States in sub period of Mercury during the major
period of Venus. Sheh as a well-settleds how makings teady
progress.

eq* irrsGe+ qd [rTrr{qtsqqrI 
*-.ig qqgiig qlq: ttcltT(Tilr6ll'\:e ll



372 Brihat ParasaraHora Sastra

q[t€qqzffigq: qnctqrfl q {n€fqE I
qwqfxtr queit q eqrdl g(artt: nqtl

7-8. PARVATA YOGA .' Beneficsin  angles will produce
Parvatha loga, as the 7th and 8th are vacant or are occupied by
only benehcs. One born in Parvatha yoga will be wealthy,
cloqucnt, charitable,learnedi n Sastras,f ond of mirtb, famous,
splendorousa nd be the leadero fa city.

Notes : This yoga is formed at least in many ways accord;
ing to different cla$ical authors.

l. According to our version, there need be beneficsi n
anglesw hile the ?th and 8th are unoccupiedo r bc in oocupation
by bencfie alonc. Then the yoge formed is known as Parvataa
yogE.

2. The Tamll edition of ParasaraH ora (translatedb y C.G.
Rajan) has this yoge in two manners : That is, Beneficsi n
angles aod 6th and tth. Alternatively beneficse hould be in
anglesa nd 9th.

3. Thc Sanskrit edition of Sri VenkateswaraP ressg ivest his
yoga apin in two forms thus ; (l) As per our version. (2) The
lords of thc ascendanat nd of the l2th in mutual angles and be
aspectedb y friendly Planets. Theset wo are exactly followed by
Sata Yoga Manjari (English translation by Prof. B. S' Rao).

4. Whereas the Sanskrit text of Sata Manjari Raja yoga
(Hindi translation by Pt' G.K. Ojha) puts it thus : The
dispositoro f ascendantlo rd should be in his own sign or in his
Mootatrikma sign which is identical with an aogle or a trine
reckoned from thc asccndant. Phele Deepila exactly describes
this yoga in this very manner

5. Coming to Jateledesa Mlrgl, we find yet another
versiont bus : If the ascendant4, th, ?th and l0th are occupied
by planetswhile the 8th and l2th are unoccupied,P arvata Yoga
oocurs. There is no mention of beneficso r malefics in angles.
That ig theseh ousess hould remain occupied. Horasara( p. 233)
hasa n identical version.

6. Chaukambtiac dilion hasi t as given by C G. Rajan's
first mentioned yoga.

7. The edition ofThakur PrasadP ustak Bhandard escribes
tbis yoga as per our version.



Clapter 36 n3
8, Now see Jataka Fari$ts. It hss again two forus of

this Yoga. The first one is formed in a manner identical with
one mentioned in the Tamil version of Parasara Hora- The
second type is formed as per the second yop related to tsombay
serieso f ParasaraH ora. However, the Tamil version of Jrtrlr
Perijtta (1926 edition by SastraS anieevani Press) bas it as our
reit has.

9. A version of Yavanas forms this yoga thus : The
ascendant,7 th and l0th be occupied by benefics. So simplc and
no more pre-requisites. Note the 4th smong anglesi s omitted
by Yavanas. Thus therc are 8o Inany varieties of Parvata Yoga.

When we consider the version given in our text, the
nraturity of this yoga will bc during the Dasa periods of the
beneficsi n the angles.

qdrlsql fqq: *iaqill lfqft qr{t I
srgq) qr e{*6E€t qtri tfnGlil rreu
*ncdt Frqit q*ragrgwiGcc:r 
qq|sF=*q qFFTIq{irt qi cnt er(:u iorl

9-lO. KAHALA YOGA .' Should the 4th lord and Jupiter
be in mutual anglesw hile the ascendanltord is strong, Kahala
yoga occurs. Alternatively the 4th lord being in his own or

' exaltation sign should be conjunct the lOth lord. In efrect, the
native will be energetic,a deventurousc, unning, endowed with a
.complete army consisting of chariots, elephants, horses and
infantry and will lord over a few villages.

Notes : This yoga is given identically in the other three
versionso f Parasara Hora, yiz. Venkateswara,C haukamba
and Thakur Prasadeditions. Still others define this in difrerent
ways.

l. The first type of Kahala Yoga according to the Tamil
yersiont raoslatedby C.G. Rajan is formed when the iords of
the ninth and fourth are in mutual anglesas the ascendantl ord
is endowedw ith strength. The secondt ype of yoga mentioned
by him is formed if the 4th lord is in his own signo r in exaltation
in conjunction with or in aspectt o the l0th lord. The aspocto f
the l0th lord is an addition in the Tamil version whereasin our
version only a conjunction is noted. The native being foolish is



374 Brihat ParasaraHora Saslra

mentionedi n the Tamil issue and Bombay issue, when giving
effoctso f Kahala Yoga.

2. Mantreswarahas it entirely differently thus : The
dispositorof ascendantl ord's dispositors houldbe in exaltation
or own sign identical with a trine or angle reckonedfr om the
ascendant. The effects mentioned are : prosperity, nobility,
auspiciousnesbse, nevolencaen d kindness.

3. Jetakadsa Merga mentions it in the same way as per
C. G. Rajan's first type of yoga. Jataka Parijata follows
JetakadesaM arga while it adds the secondv ersionof Kahala
Yoga given by our text.

afi{i SSn *i geld g inq(: I
{qet fqilt qI iqn Eqri qi uttn
rlctt zil qqfd il fq(!it{t s qfiea: t
nrdt si6qrfr1 qr qrqi qTqt wr: tltRll

ll-12. CHAMARA YOGA.'If the ascendanlto rd is exalted
in an angle and be aspectedb y Jupiter, Chamaray oga is formed.
This yogaa lso occursi f two.beneficsa re in the ascendanto, r 9th,
or lOth or 7th. The effectso f ChamaraY oga are : the nativew ill
be a king or honoured by the king, long-lived, scholarly,
eloquenta nd versedi n all arts.

Notes : While most texts are identical with our versioD,
Pbah Deepikr puts it in a different way, viz. the ascendantb e
occupied by a benefic while the ascendant lord is in a good
housco r in exaltation. The cffects attributed by Mantreswara
are : long life, prosperingl ike increasingM oon, fame,virtue and
leadership. These are comparable[ to what is generallys tated'
for ChamaraY oga.

qqn ilit Sd-qodql trrql fqq: t
rid il wit,ftil qt rfrfa qrqElltlll
ffie*geigsd qqq!: gq{q qdt: I
gq$qt fffi* dvtrnlln<l ?r<l:l tvll

13-14.S ANKHA YOGA.' If thc ascendantl ord is strong
as thc lords of the 5th and 6th are in mutual angles,t hen what
is known as Sankbe yoga is produced, Alternatively if the



Chapter 36 fl5

ascendantlo rd along with the l0th lord is in a movabb rigo as
the 9th lord is strong, Sankhay oga is obtained. One born with
Sankha yoga will be endowed with wealth, spouseand sons,
be kindly disposed,p ropitious, intelligent, merltoriouse nd long-
lived.

sqi qrqt itl q,t: rqrffi: t
mn fir{Q ilstr H g*caent: tlttll
qft{qadg{il stt: dfcgwFffi: t

: snin{€Trql dt r}rf} ittfrn qi} qiE lt tqll
15-16.B HERI YOGA .' If the l2th, ascendant,2nd and

?th are occupiedas the 9th lord is strong, thc native obtaitis
Bheri yoga. Again another kind of Bheri yop is formed if
Venus,J upiter and the lord of the ascendanta re in an anglc
while the 9th lord is strong. The resultso f Bheri yoga are the
native will be endowedw ith wealth, wife and sons,be a king, be
famous, virtuous and endowedw ith good behaviour,b appiness
and pleasures.

ffi* ilit da: hi oli rq*tqql: I
1egftrl qrdtsat pl {r ilistt: gdtrlsrt

17. MRIDANGA YOGA .' If the ascendantl ord is strong
as others occupy angles, trines, own houseso r exaltation sigos,
Mridanga yoga is formed. The native concernedw ill be a king
orequal to a king and be happy.

6ri{i 6di gV $f{i qrqqtFqt I
qJr: sfrnqi*se ittfr: rTlwTl i[q: lrlqrl

|8.'SRINATHA YOGA.' If the ?th lord ie in the lOth
while the lOth lord is exaltedand be in the componyo f thc 9th
lord, Srinathay oga takes place. The native with this yoga ryill
be equal to lord Devendra( the god of gods).

Notes : For Sagittarius ascendant, this yoga is simply
formed if the Sun and Mercury are ln the l0th in Virgo. But
it is to be ensuredt hat Mercury is in the first half of Virgo.



t76 Brihal ParasaraH ora Sasta

cfi gdrr td t'id s{* Tq* |
qtrrEd ol grl* n Si eni q {rrir: trtqrr
siT*g"itril: qdt fcnl 1lfn* r
tqvd wrrtffi: trRi qrqt qil: ltRotl

19-20. SARADA YOGA .. Should the l0th tord be in the
5th while Mercury is in an anglea s the Sun with strengthi s in
Leo, SardaYoga is formed. This will againo btaini f Jupiteror
Mcrcury is in a trine to tbe Moon, while Mars is in the I lth.
One born in either kind of yogaw itl obtain wealth,s pousea nd
sqns,be happy,s cholarly,d eart o king, piousa nd virtuous.

u{craqe qH qca} -{qHgt I
qtt q qg{ild q}q}sri qeeqdilt:uqttl
rF'rFrfr: seqqftrtortftaeeeaqr 
q{itfqstamqf q qiwrdi q Enqi uRqu

2t-2). MATSYA YOGA.. Benefics in the 9th and the
ascendant,m ixed planetsi n the 5th and maleficsin  the 4th and
8th-this array of planets at birth will produceM atsyay oga.
ln effect, the native will be an astrologer, be a synonymo f
kiodness,b e virtuous, strong, beautiful, famous,l earneda nd
pious.

Notec : While our vcrsion and that of Chaukambha
mcnlion that the ascendantand the 9th be occupiedb y bencfic
planetr, the versionsofSri VenkateswaraP ress,T hakur Prasad
PustakaB handar and C. G. Rajan stipulate that maleficsa nd
not benefics should bc in the ascendanat nd the 9th. Jrtatr
PrrlStr has tbe samev iew as given by the latter group requiring
nrlcfics in the 9th and in the ascendant.

That it is bcnefics that should be in the ascendanat nd the
9th is obviouslyc orrect as three groups are selectedb y parasaa
forthis yoga, thus : Benefics in the first group, rnatefics in the
secondg roup and both (i.e. mixed) in the 3rd group.

gnfumr: qlrqr: eqdf"qg€E{rqIr: 
- frcrqt{qil: qqr: q{firr: Tqq'l€qqTt:t Rltl



ChapterX G 377

qdali q"t Tfr dtt udgvnfrqilI' 
t1ferryrr0 ir qdl rFr.Frnrs'n: qvtr

23-24. KOORMA YOGA .. If the sth, 6th and the 7th
are occupied by benefic planets identical with own houseo r
exaltationo r friendly signwhile maleficsa re in the 3rd I lth and
the ascendanti n own house or in exaltation,K oorma yoga is
formed. The resuttso f Koorma yoga are : the native r"-itt-U" 
king, becourageous,v irtuous, famous,'helpful, happy and b"e
leadero f men.

qrQ{i 'qifiqr€Q qid qrqnrqi r
il.+i *Fa$tsrri a{rr*rr: g nqqeu Rtrr
qqqqli qgiq-d qrf$Trrqgq1fiqA: t
rtrtr* qfa{tqfeq: lnil: Snil} ;rt: ttRi,u

25-26.KHADGA YOGA.. Sbould there be an exchange
irf signs between the lords of the 2nd and the 9rh as
the ascendantl ord is in an angleor in a trine Khadgayoga is
obtainable. One with Khadga yoga wiil be cndowed with
weatth, fortunes and happiness, be tcarned in sastras, be
intelligent,m ighty, gratefula nd skilful.

iri qeferlud qrTt* :r rqqhqi r
. qr{rfqt qqrds' q qqq}dq: rdlaiil rrRsrr

gsql gorq qql qilIT'qqrfqil: t
qrT* q{arsr} iTq{lq'li q* qiE nRctl

27-28. LAKSHMI YOGA .. If the 9th lord is in an angte
identical with his Moolatrikonas ign or own signo r exaltation
sign while the aseendanlto rd is endowedw ith strength,L akshmi
yoga occurs. The native with this yoga will be charming,
yirtuous, kingly in st&tus,e ndowed with many soos and
abundantwealtb,b e famousa nd be of high moral merits.

F l fwt 1rrl *;'c', qraqii nqTFatI 
qriTiraq* di qlrlsd EtlrTrfrsi:l Retl
qq] il qqgci l n i{Kilr iFfr qtfr ua: I
5frgql gurt f{Er{ qrqt :8(lqrElu l otl



378 Brihat porasara lIora Sastra
29-30 KUSUMA YOGA .. Venus in an angle, the Moon

in a trine along with a benefica nd Saturn in the l0th-these
planetst hus cause Kusuma yogaf or one born in a fixeds ign
ascending. Sucha  native will be a king or equal to him, be
charitable,w ill enjoy pleasures,b e happy, prime among his
racem en,v irtuousa nd red-lettered

frdtl q=ql ila Xuqngilta*r 
qi ilqlcf srrrci dq: q qrcrnp, .ittl
milfqfuqgct;nl gorqq qqqfiEd:I 
*rqtl: {dt qrd qafqerrfiqfkretr:l Rtl

3l-32. KALANIDHI YOGA .. Should Jupiter be in the
2nd or the 5th and be aspectebdy  Mercury and Venus,Katanidhi
yoga is caused. In effect, the nativew ill bevirtuous, honoured
by the kings,b ereftof diseasesb,e  happy,w ealthya nd tearned.

tai mH FqgS il qlq: fieq€qlr Tr:u llrl
e{lariXa} Xq} uqleqT craiXa:I 
gafcql aqr{sir qftqre ;tt n}q rrlvrr

33-34.KALPADRUMA YOGA .. Note the foilowing four
planets : (a) the ascendant lord, (b) the dispositor of the
asccndanlto rd, (c) the dispositoro f the planeta t ',b", (d) the
Navamsad ispositoro f the planeta t "c',. If all thesearedisposed
in anglesa nd trines from the ascendanto, r be exatted, Kalpa-
druma yoga exists.' Ong with this yoga will be endowed
with all kinds of wealth, be a king, pious, strong, fond of
war and merciful.

Notes : Kalpa Druma yoga is also known as Parijata
Yoga. Kalpa Druma denotest he Celestial Tree while Parijata
denotes the Celestial Flower. Both of rhese are kpown to
grant any boon to the possessowr ho is said to be Devendra,
the god ofgods.

In the obtainment of yoga, there aro four participants.
This yogac anb e noted in thefollowingchart.

Born on July 23, 1856at 0612h rs at 18N32T IES?.



Chapter3 6 319

Merc
Sat

Asc
Sun
Ven



380 Dflrd parasara Hora Sasna
Now see how Kalpa Druma yoga is forncd in the chart.

The constituentso f the yoga are :
(a) The ascendantlO rd Moon.
(b) The ascendantlo rd's dispositorJ upiter.
(c) Jupiter is in own sign and hence 

'(d) no dispositor.
Jupiter's Navamsa dispositori s Jupi6 unscras nc
is in SagittariusN avamsa.

All the above are in a trine from the natal sscendant
who clearly form Karpa'druma yoga. The effects ,.oito.i
by the sagew ere obtained by the owner of rhc au"rt, n"r"
crangadharT ilak, including fondnessfo r war to get the country
freed from foreign rule.

T{t;iqr6astma|rtqq Rtrr: qnQ: r
stSor{ ragurtefwt: d€trrf{q: nlgl
cQnq rqscHiqlifgrfiti qF: I
q[ Qtr: qafr Raq qagTrfEignu:l qtl

35-36. TRIMURTHI YOGAS.. Counted from the 2nd
lord if benefics occupy the 2nd, l2th and 8th, Hari yop ie
formed. If the 4rh, 9th and 8rh with reference to itre-eign
occupicd by the 7rh lord are occupied by bcneficr, Hara
yoga is obtainable. Brahma yoga is generatedif , counted from
the ascendant lord, beneficsarei n the 4th, lOth and lith
signs.One born in anyone of the said three yogasw ill be happy,
lcarned and endowed with wealtha nd sons.

.Notes: There areactually three different yogasgivenin
the present two verses. These are Hari Yoga, Hara yoga
and Brahma Yoga. This representst he trinity of Hindu Gods
and hence is known as Trimurthi yogasj ointly. Somei nterpret
this as one yoga knowing it as 'Hariharabrahmay oga' which
is howeveri ncorrect.

For formation of Hari Yoga the 2nd lord's position is
to be noted firstly. From the said position of thc 2nd lord,
eachofthe 2nd, l2th and 8th be occupiedb y beneficsi ndividu-
ally. Seet he chart on the next page.



Chapter 36 381

In the above case, the 2nd lord is Saturn. Note from
Saturn, the 2nd is_occupiedb y Venus, the l2th by Mercury
and the 8th by Jupiter.

The second yoga is Hara Yoga (Hara denotes lord
Sive.) See the chart given_abovef or an easy grasp fulfilling
the conditions laid down by'Parasara.



382 Brihai parasara Hora Sastra

ln the abovccase, Saturn ruies the 7rh housea nd is
pfaced in Pisces. From him the 4th, gth and 9th are
respectivelyo ccupicdb y Jupiter, Venus and Mercury. Thus
forms Hara Yoga.

. I,astlyB rahmayoga. This is forrired if the 4th, l0th and
llth frorn the sign occupied by the ascendantt ord are
tenentcd by bencfics.N ote this yoga from the foltowing
chart.

In the above example, the ascendantl ord Mars is in
Aries. Note that the 4th, l0th and ilth from Uarr-"i,
occupiedby Jupiter,V enusa nd Mercury in order.

In eachy oga,t hree housesa re mentioned, i.e. 2nd, l2th
and 8th on theone hand; 4th, gth andg th on the otherhand
and the 4th, 10th and lrth in the third instance.r r,is tate,
careof possiblem aximum erongation between Mercury and
venus. The Moon can arso be consideredi n repracemenot f
one of the said beneficsi f sbei s in waxing state. The Sun
should not participate in theseh ouseslu si rit<e any marefic.
If these Moon is herserfa  marefich er presenceis  arsoe xcluded
in thesey ogas.



Chapter 36 383
qril;q{Fgri: glsri: tIITTETq'f{qfedt: 
qlql ilnftrddtsltqt qErilT{ n€qREe <frr r 1 s  rr 

37. LAGNADHI YOGA .. Should beneficsb e in the Zth
and the 8th counted from the ascendanta nd be devoid of
conjunction/aspect of malefics, Lagnadhi yoga is produced
makingo nea greatp erson,l earnedi n Sastrasa nd happy.

Notes : Sage Parasara does not include the 6th house
from the ascendantf or Lagnadhiy oga. Only two housesa re
suggestedv, iz. the 7th and 8th from the ascendant.T bis
is so given in the versionso f Chaukamba,S ri Venkateswara
Press, Thakur Prasad Pustaka Bhandara and C G. Rajan as
well. The last three versions have an additionaf condition
that the 4th house from the ascendant should at the same
time be vacant. In Chandradhi yoga, the sagehas included
the 6th house, seec h.37i nfra,

After a study of the various texts, we can conclude to
the followirg effect : The 6th, 7th and 8th be occupied by
benefics in any manner, i.e. the three bencfics, viz, Jupiter,
Mercury and Venus may be disposed in one, two or three
housesi n 6th, 7th and 8th. No other malefic should be in these
housesn or aspect the occupants.T he 4th from the ascendanto r
from the Moon. as the casem ay be, shouldr emainu noccupied.
Then Adhi yoga is obtained. The beneficsm entonieds hould
also be free from combustionand debilitation. If the yoga is
formed in the above conditions, the native will Ue nighly
learned, wcalthy and be among the most supremem en on
the earth.

The best Adhi yoga is, however, with Mercury in the 6th,
Jupiteri n the 7th and Venusi n the gth house.

mrQ q6o**q gql, qq I
rilgi uawiaftrqt,T 

"
q. f€qiTlRHit  Ru* rrler r

qRrq* 
Fuq {ltr{ H+ q-qTQ"I: 
frreaft* qrdl fqqqral {qEfiqil:n lerr

38-39. EFFECTS OF ASCENDANT LORD'S DIVISIO.
NADIGNITIES.' The ascendanrt ord in parijathamsa wiil make
one happy,i n Vargothamaim mune to diseasesi,n  Gopuramsa



384 Brihat PurasaraH ora Sustra

rich with wealtha nd grains,i n Sinrhasanamsaa k iog, in parava-
thamsa a scholar, in Devalokamsa opulent and endorved
with conveyancesa, nd in lravatamsaf amousa nd honouredb y
kings.

Notes : The dignities mentioneda bove could be found
on p. 90 suprr. Vargothama indicates a planct occupyingth e
sameR asia nd the sameN avamsa.

3M WFqlqpqrq: l l lett
Chapter 37

Lunar Yogas
qatReaw;i {rrefi,Tf{qi EFqrEI  
rariligurr{tft ?{qrTsq'|.tqrfq Q rrlrr

t. If the Moon with refereni:eto  the Sun is in an angle,
Panapharaor Apoklima, one's wealth, intelligencea nd skill
will be respectivellyit tle, meddlinga nd excellent.

T{tt il ?{rfhfq"it Rq:erqf {qt {T{i}| 
Ulor T{qt r? qre} uqg<ilf}{f,:n Rtl
€iqi n T{Tlufqrii Rqalq {r{r1finf{r I
rfttlt T{qt il? ila} qilgqrftqd: uQtl
qqfqq'fiq?t q n*wnqqlffifr 1
Erqesilu* Trql qtisRqfi?tials.rqT11 r,,

2-4. In the caseof a day birth if the Moon, placed in
own Navamsao r in a friendly Navamsa,i s aspectedb y Jupiter,
one will be endowedw ith wealth and happiness. One born
in night time will enjoy. similare ffectsi f the Moon is in own
Navamsa or in friendly Navamsa in aspectt o Venus. ln a
contrary situation, the aspect of Jupiter or of Venus on the
Moon will make one go with little wealth or even without
that.



Clapter37 lqF
Er?iiTH;ErrRwqestl ri: €{rfqq}q6: I
ill(rErr i[ rT;?tq *ildilwq irq{rnE ilul

5. ADHI YOGA FROM THE MOON : lf benefics
occupyt he 8th, 6th and ?th counted from the Moon, Adhi
yogao btains. According to the strengthof the participating
planets, the nativec oncernedwill be eithera king or a minister
or an army chief.

ffFq zllqqi: r{: qtula} qqq-{t I
enrd qdquqlw n g*nwu* rtqrrqrt

6. DHANA YOGA .' Should all the (three) benefics be
in Upachaya'(i.e.3 rd, 6th, l0th and lltb) counted from
the Moon, one will be very affiuent; with two beneficss o
placedh e will have mediume ffects in regard to wealth. If a
singleb enefici s there, the wealth will be negligible.

ffarE Feil;iqlqqTaQ  Q qf fe{r ffq t
qlql B<trtr€q:t t\ett

(Iqr eil {rqgeq} il dtffrqlfrqps?: I
€tqTfqdrqwq *q'1frrgw.t: llqll
qtrsrrcntttqq vnqqq aqrddtfilqq t
{r6rr{i{rsil6Tcrrrg} €, c{: qqf}qa: ttett
gTqRqTI amil qiqr$f-itt: I
qa$rixrl qlqe Ti qil g{€trl$r<:ll loll

7.10, SUNAPHA, ANAPHA AND DURADHARA : If
therei s a planet,o ther than the Suq,i n the 2nd from the Moon
Sunaphay oga, in the l2th Anapha yogaa nd planets in both
places Duradhara yoga are caused.One with Sunapha yoga
will be a king or equal to a king. endowedw ith intelligence,
wealth,f ameand self earnedw ealth' One born in Anapha yoga
will be a king, be free from diseasesv,i rtuous,f amous charming
and happy. One born in Duradharay oga will enjoy pleasures,
be charitable and endowed with wealth, conYeyanceasn d
excellents ervingf orce.



386 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

ffinqTauilfrrn* ftrrr qrt r lqTt, l
6ftqEsrgrflarr;l enqffisqil ul ttl
qlq: tq{q} ilq il? snfrsffie: r
gfiffiEqhte effimfTc:'nlRtl
orqftrq€i Tr{drT} ffiqa: r
Fqsi{ rcadtfa qa} anq ffic nlitl

ll-13. KEMADRAMA YOGA .. E4cludingt he Sun,s hould
there be no planet with the Moon or in the 2nd/l2th from
the Moon or in an angle from the ascendant, Kemadruma
yoga is formed. One born in Kemadrumay oga will be very
much reproached, be bereft of intelligence and learning and
reducedt o penury and perils.

sTsrrR qlTTeqrq:1 1Qtel  
Chroter 38

J| c IoI Ir' ar r ogas
qqq smdqwdirq Rir rrr lFrrfqfr: I
ift-qlfrqqTafr q e*qrq{: srnE n tll

l. YESI, YOSI AND UBHAYACHARI YOGAS .. Barring
the Moon, if a planet among Mars etc. be in the 2nd from the
Sun Vesi yoga, in the l2th Vosi yoga and planets in both the
2nd and the l2th Ubhayachariyoga are caused.

s$lT TrEFnsq. d *tirrqlsqFlf,qr r
{qwqFqf{tilfq tffiqqgqwq: ultl
qlril q ftgql <rei q{ilf{srlil?Fa; r
illqqqt qrd {fr qr ir*tlr: qe'tr rlrr

2-3. EFFECTS OF THESE YOGAS .. One born in Vesi
yoga will be evens ightgd,t ruthful, long-bodied,i ndolent, happy



Chapter 39 387

and endowed with negligiblewealth. Oneborn with Vosi yoga
will be skilful, charitable and endowed with fame, lcarning -
and strength.The Ubhayachari native will be a king or egual to
a king and be haopy.

{qqtq? drn sqtd frfwilnq r
qr(rgqlliqfr qli iI $eFFqqt ltY|l

4. Benefics causing these yogas will give the above
mentionede ffectsw hile maleficsw ill produce contrary effects.

sTs{ts rq}qtsqrq: I|  1Q .ll
Chapter 39

Raja Yogas
eFtr&r: <rqftrr{ fireilcc I r
iqi fqilrqqdq nqHFfr ilfr n\ rrqrr" 
I *qr: wnrr *wi: 3rl' *qqilq6: I
eqi srtqei qei €rn Frq-"ri t u1rl

l-2. O excellentof the Brahmins, I now narrate betow
the RaJayogasmaking one entitled to royal honours. These
were told to Parvati by Lord Siva once upon a time, the
gist of whieh is as follows :

fffiE 6r<ti{i fi wgirf5qqrfgq! |
rrq*rrfil Al A1 qalQel rltenr: nul
3friqrrra6g"nqt qlq*ri sftqlE I
rgeeammwi a{q F{Rtrq ! ttvtt

I

srrrqr{ g.iqd qr qri {hdggrc: rrtrr
3-5 These yogas are to be known from the Karakarnsa

ascendant and the natal ascendant. On the one hand the



388 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

pair of Atmakaraka and Putrakaraka and on the other hand
the natal ascendant lord and the 5th lord be considered.
Tbe effects due to such association will be full, or a half
or I quarter accordingt o their strengths.

Notes : Raja Yogas giving status can be tbrmed with
Karakamsa Lagna as the reckoningp oint. Similarly the natal
ascendanits  also another centerw herefrom such yogase manate'
(Karakamsa Lagna is the Navamsa occupied by the Atma
Karaka planet.)

If Karakamsa ascendanti s oeing consideredin  eval-
uation of Raja yogas, the status of Putra Karaka is also
to be taken into account. Here Putra Karaka is Chara
Karaka. He is the 6th in statusi n the Atma Karaka scheme,
as eiplained in slokas13-17 of ch. 32 supra. On the other
hand ifnatal ascendant is being consideredt he 5th lord from
natal ascendanst hould also be scrutinized in terms of dignity,
so that the real clues to the yoga are made out rightly. The
Sth tord has been given a very important position in the analysis
of Rajr Yoges by the saged quating hin with the 9th lord
or evenm ore, vide stokas33 and 34 of the current chapter.

We shall now take an expandedc lue of the two hints
given in tho present verses about the evaluation of Raja
yogBs.

There are certain Raja Yogas formed with reference
to Karakamsaascendant, Atma Karaka's position in the Rasi
chart, Amatya Karaka, Upapada,Arudha pada etc.-so to say
in the Jaimini style-as can be seen in our present text. For
cxample takc the rule given in sloka 22 of the current chapter
where it is stated that Atma Karaka in benefic's Rasi or
Navamsa will make one wealthy. In the chart given in
ch. 29 (sloka l-3), we have Atma Karaka Moon in Jupiter's
Navamsa. So as per the rule the native should becoms
rich. To strengthent his argument,w e find Jupiter in exalta-
tion. Putra Karaka (Chara scheme) for the gid horoscope
in the Sun. He aspects the ascendant. In the Navamsachart,
the Sun is placed in the 4th from Atma Karaka. All these
indicate that 'the native should be wealthy. If Putra Karaka
(Chara) and Karakamsa Lagnaare not well related,t he yogas
relatedt o that schemew ill be futile.



' 
Chapter 39 t89

Next take the natal ascendanlto rd and the 5ti lord from
the natal ascendant. In assessintgh e Raja yogass trengthr alated
to the natal ascendant, the strength'and relationship between
theset wo lords should be correctly understood. In the exampte
chart cited aboVe,t he 5th lord is Jupiter who is exalteda nd is
cndowedwith a Shadbalaof 9,32 Rupas and Mars 7.32 Rupas.
Their Vimsopaka strengths-are respectively 16.45 aod 16.g0
points making them extrenely well disposedt o causev igopr to
anyRaja yoga in thc horoscope

Hcnce it is apparent that the sage.correlatesth e Chara
Putra Karaka with the Karakamsa ascendant (or Atmakaraka)
and the 5th lord from natal ascendant with the lord of the
natal ascendantit self.

qfi{i qF{} qr} qeqtd s qrt r
grritr.FtT.ffl qq t erri q Fqt Rqarrqrr
Tq1ril rqi* F{i arsftq wnqfattfrc} r
q(Rqrcrclrfrse wa: qqlil: qqrFqil letl

6-7 MAHA RAJA YOGA .. Should the ascendantI ord
and the sth loid exchange their sigus or if Atrna karaka
and Putra Karaka (Chara) are in the ascendant,t he 5th,
exaltation sign, own sign or own Navamsa m aslrcct to a
benefic, Maha Raja yoga is produced. The native so born
will be famousa nd happy.

Notes : An exchange between the ascendant lord and
the 5th lord will bestowa  supremeR aja yoga on the native.
For example in the caseof a Pisces-born,J upiter in the 5tb
and the Moon in the ascendant.

In the second stage,t he Atma lkraka and Putra Karaka
(Chara) are brought in the picture. They can be jointly in
the 5th or in the ascendant( or in Karakamsa Lagna and
the 5th from there) or separatelyin thesc places. Alternatively,
both ofthem should be in their respective exaltations igns,
or in own signs, or in own Navamsas and be related to a
benefic by aspect. In this respect, the horoscope of Mrs
Gandhi will serve us with a perfect exapple. Her chart can
be found with reference to sloka 50 in ch. 24 supra. The
Atma Karaka is Saturn (21" 50') while Putra Karaka is Mercury



3m Brihat Parasara Hora Sasfia

(13'll'). It may be noted that Saturn is in the ascendant
while Mercury is in the 5th lifting the native to Himalayan
heights through the said Maha Raja yoga. Atma Karaka
Saturni s in his own Navamsa and Merury is in tbe lOth from
KarakemsaL agno.

qrr}u: srftl q|i qeqt cqtsfq qt t
trqtrqs{rdrd qudaXifaal ncrl

t. If the ascendant lord and Atmakaraka are in the
ascendant, sth or 7th in conjunction with or in aspect to a
benefic,t here obtainsa  Raja yoga.

Notes : If the ascendanlto rd himself becomest hes*trdt
Kantka his merc placement in the ascendanti tself or in
the 5th/7th from the ascendanti n associationw ith a benefic
will causea  similar Raja yoga. In tho case of Mrs Gandhi,
the Atma Karaka is in the ascendantw hile the ascendant
lord Moon is in exchangew ith him in the 7th. The Moon is
favourably aspected by 'yoga karaka Jupiter from the I lth
house speakingf or the native's high and successfulp olitical
cSreer.

mlrrtq wwr*nR ui g{ q qaqt I
qr€aXil wrt wrfr trw rlq q!tl{ natl
afriqqi mi q|qqQgifHt t
qrd qil qi+i m fqqsii tiq trlott

9-10. Shouldt here be beneficsi n the 2nd,4th and sth
counted either from the ascendantl ord or from Atmakaraka
sign, one will become a king. Similarly malefics in the 3rd
and 6th from the said places.

eciii il q"qt {* sft+st1etfqt t
irti qr{qi qrsfr ilErqqT qa?iq:u l ttl

l l. Onewillbe relatedto royal circles if Venus is in
fis kaJakamsa,o r in the 5th therefrom or in the ascendant
or in Arudha ascendant in aspcct to or in the company of
Iupiter or the Moon.



Clapter 39. 39t

Notes : The planet Venus should be in one of the four
places,v iz. Karakamsaa scedantA, rudha ascendantn, atal ascend-
ant and in the 5th from Karakamsaa scendant.( Arudha ascend-
ant is also known as Arudha Pada,vide ch. 29 supra.) Being
placeds o, Venus must be related to the Moon or Jupiter by
aspect/association.

Taking the examplec hart given in ch. 29, we find Venus
is in the Karakamsaa scendanat long with the MooD (the Atma
Karaka). The native is thus related to people with high social
statust hrough his professionasl phere.

srwg':tlil{}<tH' 6-silH' ia *afaq r
qtqtor q;aetf aal TtE|qI{ EFr:lt tRtl

12. Even if a single planet aspectst he natal ascendant
or Hora Lagnao r Ghatika Lagna,t he nativew ill becomea  king.

Notes : Hora Lagna and Ghatika Lagna are narrated
on page 63 supra. If a planet aspectso ne of the three
ascendants,v iz. natal ascendant,H ora Lagna and Ghatika
La,gnai,n  becomesa  Karaka planet- or significatogr iving status
etc. to the nafivc.

ildsqEf+ ffilniegilfui I
rrqqlrrl rrqdq frflq{rr EilRq ! ttt1tt
qqqce q l
S c

qtEE6E qTaqhfqff, riri Elrrq t6tr{ nlvrl
a

13-14.I f the six divisions (shadvargaso) f theascendanr
is occupie-do r aspected by one and the same planet, a
Raja'yoga is doubtlesslyfo rmed. According to the aspect is
'full, half or one fourth, resultsw ill be in order full, medium
and negligible.

Notes : Rasi," Hora, Drekkana, Trimsamga,N avamsa
and Dvadasamsa constitute Shadvargao r six divisions. If a
planet occupiest he ascendanitn  all these 6 charts it causes
a powerful Raja yaga.A spectsa re referredt o in the divisional
charts ,here.I  am unablet o fully conceivet he logic in aspects

' in divisionalc hartsf or the sagehimselfr eferred to longitudinal
aspectuale valuationsin  an earlierc hapter.W ithout commen-



le2 Brihat ParasaraH oro Saslra

ting further on this controversial aspect I leave it at that,
acceptingm y limitationst o explaint his fully.

wflA €{dEqTi di nar oriE {q{ |
qar qrl E6Tds{iF r}radgql 6r t nt{rr

15. If the 3 ascendant(si. e.n atal ascendant,H ora Lagna
and Ghatika Lagna)are occupiedb y planetsi n exaltation/own
eign or if the natal ascendant, Drckkana ascendant and
Navamsaascendanth ave exaltedp lanets,R aja yoga is formed.

qt qq q-{i q ui l<gtl ilcTTI 
rfrsqrqdaqqd qsrqlqt ?Td vra:r rl  qrr

16. If the Moon and a benefic 4re in the Arudha Lagna,
as Jupiter is in the 2nd from natol ascendanta nd both the
placesa re aspectedb y planetsi n exaltationo r in own sign,t here
will be a Raja yoga.

qf qq {* iq{ EdE qrqdqt r
ag{ aqi rFAttlTTETirI€ rr}sfqq r ltetl

17. If the ascendant,2 nd and 4th are occupied by
beneficswhile a malefici s in the 3rd, one will becomea  king oi
equalt o a king. ,

t{t"ntd qfwio} il dts} qr {s qErn I
lul fi u;trtFrrT: fqri fq{rFili fqr: rrqerr

. 18. The native will be wealthyi f one amongt he Moon,
fupiter, Venusand Mercury is exaltedi n the 2nd house.

qGisrat Edlt .n rE-Fq?'tilrin qil: I
ed ntq rqfrrarql ttraql TTwtqlrreu: l Q.tl

19. Ifthe 6th, Eth andthe 3rd are occupiedbydebili-
tated planets as the asceqdantl ord is exalted or is in (his
other) own housea nd aspectsth e ascendantt.h ere is a Raja yoga.

qEdscaq?qqrqt{frlra Tq1 ftgtsrarrr: r
FiltrqTqqrrilin] qrei q$ilq TFqE:u Rotl



Chapter 39 393

20. Again a itaja yoga is formed if the 6th, 8th and
l2th lords are in fall or in inimical signs or in combustion
as the ascendant lord placed in his (other) own sign or in
exaltation sig4 aspectst he ascendant.

Tqlnrq{qwr<tctn} qrd q{dqq< tnrrcI: 
qqr: +rrReriil ETrsfTr tsrn:l rrsl inq: ltRl tl

21. lf the lOth lord, placedi n his own house or in
exaltation, aspects the ascendant,a Raja yoga is formed.
Similar is the casei f beneficsa re in angles

ltmt{il {rqiri q rnr<6'} qffTrrtq ia r
9 o  o  \  

r  t  -  .  - '

t{{t6';r{ {{ 1;t {Inil $qtqd ilRRrl
22. If ttre Atmakaraka is in a benefic'sR asi/Navamsa,

the nativewill be wealthy. If therea re $eneffcsin  angelsf rom
KarakamsaL agna.h e will becomea  king.

qr{rGa qr(qEf qq: +;r {Tqii qR r
fqqriqr fat}qi il aatttan i dnq: rrRlrr

23. If the Arudha [,agna and Darapadaa re in mutual
angleso r in mutual 3rd/llth or in mutual trines, the native
will doubtlesslyb ecomea  king.

Notes : Arudha Lagna is the Paoa fcr tho natal ascen-
dant while Dara Pada is the Padaf or the 7rh house.( Chapter 29
may be referred in the context of such calculations.)

Theset wo Padas should mutually be well placed,i .e. in
mutual angles, mutualtrines or mutually 3rd and llth so that
the nativew ill enjoy a royal status.

Should the:e two Padas be in mutually 6th and 8th signs
or 2nd and l2th signs,o ne will sufferf rom povertyn ot rcceiving
the effectso f the Raja yogas in the horoscope. The good
relationship between Arudha Pada and Dara Padai s one of
the essentiapl re-requisitesf or maturity of Raja Yogas.

fiqflftriiirrrrqft q qq{qfr |
?qliql.d {redrfr iliaqqltfq Er uRvtl

24. lf two or all of Bhava Lagna, Hora Lagna, Ghatika
Lagna are in aspectt o exaltedp lanets,a  Raja yoga is formed.



394 kilnt ParasaraHora Sastra

<rqif,6n,rotils{flEqq itnr<qrfq il |
qeT trffl1tluTr$qi FFrFcaT{  q}qq: uR{tl

25. lf the said3 ascendantst,h eir decanatesa nd Navamas
or the said ascendantsa nd their Navamsaso r the saide scen-
dants and their decanatesa re aspectedb y.a planet, a Raja yoga
is formed.

qi dtqqqT{€ irrmrd fqfrqa, ,
ErA q gt-{fir$qi *ar.gcaulor qI p1qtl
gsaniqqqTqR rrcu}ql ;r d*q: r
{qrFd il? q?i ul iqg* aw.uletl

26-27.l t Arudha Padai s occupiedb y an exaltedp lanet
particularlyt he Moon in exaltationo r by Jupiter/Venus (with
or without exaltation) while therei s no Argala by a malefic,
the native will becomea  king. If the ArudhaPadai s a benefic
rign containingt hc Moon while Jupiteri s in the 2nd house,
the sameeffectw ill prcvaii.

' \ \ ^
g:wri{r}s[q alqrq] qfe md qqvafil| 

. il{sfq rrcrq}rrT: qrRlf,i ri'faq}aq ! rrqcrr
28. Eveni f oneamongt he 6th, 8th and l2th lordsb eing

in debilitationaspectsth e ascendantth ere w_illbe a Rajay oga.

fqqqi r
qErFqrt g n*q larsqrF6fr {q ilRatl
Tlan En rftrql qrfq qTdml qrqR nqq r
qG6Traqqt t'ti ar{ rTlq[il Eil tclT ltlotl

fdtqiTTri fln wi qTqF( il eHr I
etiiqr+dE ll$t fmqrgqerTTu:l  ttl

29-31.T he nativew ill becomea  king if a planetr uling the
4th, l0th, 2nd or the I lth aspectst he ascendant,w hile Venus

aspectsth e I lth from ArudhaLagnaasA rudha Lagnai s occupied
by a beneficT. he samee frect will be obtainedi f a debilitated
olanetaspectsth e ascendanat nd is placedi n the 6th or the gth.



Chapter3 9 395

Agains imilarr esultwill prevail if a debilitatedp lanet placed
in the 3rd/l lth lendsa spectto  theascendant.

EIATIQ qr{E{qqfq <rqq}rnf€d q({ |
[EToriT?rrnita lfcaa]rravnq$ eq lllRll

32. I now tell you of the Raja yogasb asedo n the planets
with differentd ignities and on the aspectsa nd conjunctionso f
the planets.

il:wTrilftrfr qr{l ff"relH fqiqa: ,
sqn?ql;qi{6al qrdqifi€ rtnqqp; ulitl
q" g"Tfq igml dt ilfq eqqrilql r
<rdd{rrr* Erf,} qFilI qqft fi&qt{ lllvll

33-34.T he 9th lord is akin to a minister, and more
especiallyt he 5th lord. If theset wo planetsm utuallya spect,
thi nativer vill obtain a kingdom.E ven if theset wo are conjunct
in any houseo r if be in mutuallv Tth places,o neb orn of ro.val
scionwill becomea  king

qei{rwcil qfi qrlsft qIQ+ ftqa: t
$audfw$tri g $e{if€E <rcqwr$'rtRgt

J5. The native willattain kingdom if the 4th lord is tn
the l0th and the l0th lord is in the 4th and be in aspect to
5th and 9th lords.

u{tigat: t
qrq q--qfdq ilsrl dhqt tqra] faqqi uQr(tr

36. If the lords of the 5th, lOth, 4th and the ascendant
join in the 9th, one will becomea  ruler with fame spreading
over the four directions

gqsqtfuql qrft qF.qil{q i1at r
u{arta qr 1rdt qratifr{ (rsqrnEu lerl

37. Shouldt he lord of the 4th or of the l0th join either
the 5th lord or thc 9th lord, the nativew ill obtainkingdom.



il96 Brihat parasara Hora Sastra
Notes : There are four Raja yogasm entionedi n the abovc

versew hich can be understood.ausn der: 
(l) +tn lord joining the 5th lord.
Q\ 4th lord joining the 9th lord.

. (3) l0th lord joining the 9th tord.
(4) l0th lord joining the 5 lord.

. 
'lord It will be still superiori f the 4th lord joins both the 5th

and the 9th lord, or if the lOth lord joins the 5th and
9th lord. It may be noted that this is a yoga causcd by an
angularl ord joinig a trinal lord.

qil{i wimQr t} qrirqtq .il |
crt qdsun qri ftqil wal qtr qtE rrlcrr

38. Ifthe Stht ord is in the ascendant4, th or the l0th in
the companyof the 9th lord or of the sscendantl ord, the native
will becomea  king.

q{F{rt Refi dt+ €Tt qgigil r
,iawfurtlt .Tt wa{ifir€ TTatrTFuFle .tl

39. Should Jupiterbei n his own sign identical with the
9th house and be in the companyo f either Venusor of the 5th
lord, the nativew ill obtain kingbood.

ti6q6r frmqkq qr qrdEqrfsurr 
gnr icr r3ie;il TTcT qrf,icrftsfq r uyot l

40. Two and half ghatis (i.e. 60 minutes of time) frorn
mid-dayor from mid-nighti s auspicioust ime. A birth durlng
cuch an auspicioust ime will cause one to bc a king or equal
to him.

Notes : Though mid-day and mid-night are denoted in
the translation for Dinardha and Nisardba a clarification is
cssentiali n regard to the implicationso f these.M id-day simply
denotes1 2 Noon while mid-night zero hour as per commou
use. But what the sage implies is somewhat diffcrent.
Dinardha means half of the day while Nisardha meanshalf of
the night, keeping in mind the Sunriseand Sun seta r a given
place. ,The verseh as a yoga to indicate that if there is a birth



Chapter 39 397
within an hour of the saidD inardha or Nisardha, the native
will be a king. I shail illustratet his with a practicacl ase.

Take for instancea  birth on l5th February 1947 at
Jodhpur 73 E 2 and 26 N lg. The local sunr ise is ai 063ghrs
and sun set at 1749 hrs. Hence for this latitudea nd date,
the dayduration is llh llm and night duration l2h49m,
Divide the day duration by two to get Dinardhaw hich indicates
5h 35m. similarlyd ividingn ightd uratioo  by 2 we get Nisardha
as 6h 24m. Add 5h 35mt o sun rise which wilr give harf the
day duration. Thus by adding 5h 35m to Otr lgm, we get
I2h l3m. Similarly in the case of night, the nigbt durati-on
of l2h 49m be halved and the figure'arriveda t is tb be added
tosun set.  Thus weget Oh l3m ( i .e.  13 mlater thanthe
usualm id-night).

From the abovew e may understandth at by simply taking
t2 noona smid-daya nd 0 hour as mid-nighti t witt noiser". oui
purposei n the contexto fthe yogas uggestebdy  the sage. Need-
lesst o mentiont hat LMT is to be usedf or thesec alcuLtions.

Uttara Kslanrita has two yogas in this respect, viz.
Koteeswaray ogaa nd Lakshadhikaryi oga( vide crr4 , sroka3 0;.
Accordingt o its author if thereb e a birth within 2 ehatikas( i.e.
4E minutes as against parasara'sm ention of 60 minutesj of
Dinardhaa nd Nisardha,a  king is born who will conquer his
enemiesa nd observe religious rules of conducta nd be learned.
fie further addst hat if in the saidc asea n exaltedplaneti s i:i the
2nd house,i n aspectt o anothere xalted planet,a  Koteeswarais 
born' If the aspectigp lanet is in its own house( insteado f being
in eraltation) the nativew ill then be only a Lakshadher*orul
Sufficeit  to say that there will be relatively less riches in the
secondc ase.

qa: rfq rfq{ffaq?q}sai favqf€qa:r 
fqq: qrqla E[r{ qfq qrdfq}Tsr{ r[if: nvttl

41. Shouldt he Moon and Venusb e mutually in the 3rd
and I lth and be in aspects,p laced elsewherea,  Raja yoga is
obtained.

,Notes 
_ : As per the slokai n question,w e find two condi-

tions under which two Raja yogas form. In the first instance
the Moon and Venuss bouldb e in mutually 3 and ll.



39& Brihat ParasaraH ora Sastra

In the secondi nstance,t he Moon and Venusc an be any-
where but shouldmutually aspect This type of yogai s fbund
in many standardt exts.

qai qr'tflqtf,€Q sst qiFrRfq: r
qtt'Gi q q) qrf,:r  (rsrr wfe 4e1 uvltl

42 Shouldt he Moon, endowedwith strength, be in
Vargothamsaa nd be aspectedb y four or more planets,t he native
will becomea  king.

sflqilrqi qfi q!il"t1q$fqfq: I
qtf"Gisfq*  qrfr: ulsfl qfis6piie rrvlrr

i3. Onewill becomea  king if thea scendanint  Uttamamsa
is aspectebdy four or more planetso ut of which the Moon
shouldnot be one.

qofuqqRq*: ti rr€n qTcrgrufr{lcI T: 
3IfrFNNFT€FI ui{a: nvYtl

44. If one or two or three planetsb e in exaltattono ne of a
royal scion will becomea  king while another will be equal to a
king or be wealthy.

qgFq:q llqfHsfq di: t*wffioni: r
dtadwml'<rfr qrEr rIrR fqfvrc: nv{rr

45. If 4 or 5 planets occupy their exaltation signso r
Moolatrikona signs, evena person of base-birthw ill becomea 
&ing.

qqffiG"rri: dirqrrfaiqqrgarE I
q{ e6fiur <trr-q}fi iqr faqk*i t uvqll

46. lf 6 planetsa re exalted, the native will become
emp€ror and will enjoy various kinds of royal paraphernalia.

qril gtg'gqffr {q} rr rqltaiftqil; r
qqq'et M <t-"il rlf aR1ql wiE rrv\e*

47. Even if one among JuDrter- venus and Mercury is in



Chapter4 O 399

exaltation while a beneffci s in an angle the native will beiome
a king or be equal to him.

hdftqii: qt, c{: rri{q faqeTq,ri' 
Aitlitsfq d qrd: ( csrr rqFd qqq uyctl

48. If all beneficsare relepted to angles while malefics
are in the 3rd,.6thand I lth, the native,.thoughm ay be of mean
descentw ill ascend,t he throne.

erE ilsTITr6FSIqlqts'qFI [lv: o 11
Chapter40

Yogas For Royal Association
(|EttilIi vgtirannr&ngifat r
qqrFr6r(*,unfq sErFrRi 1Wailr rl rr

l. Ifthe l0th lord from the ascendant is conjunct or
aspectedb y the dispositor of Amatyakaraka or evenc onjunct or
aspectedb y Amatya karaka himself, the native will be a chief in
the king's court.

Notes : Amatya karaka is the immediate Euc@Esoro f
Atma karaka as we have seen earlier. The lord of the sign
occupied by Amatya Karaka should aspect or join the' 10th
lord counted from the ascendant;t he native will then enjoy a
high governmental position. The Amatya karaka taking the
role of his dispositor in the abovec asOw ill as well yield similar
effects.

The yogasg iven in the chapter should be related to one's
servingt he governmenti n variousc apacities dependingo n other
combinationsi n his horosope.

mfftfqt qti ' qrnr*qqfrt r
(Itrqqli ili{l fer ! sdndiq Tqmt rrRrr



400 Brihat ParosaraH ora Sastra

. 2. If the 10th and I lth are devoidof malcfic occupation/
aspectwhile the llth is aspectedb y its own lord, the nativi will
be a chief in the king's court.

Notes : This versei s opent o another interpretationth us :
the llth be devoid of maleficaspect/occupatioann d bc aspected
by own lord while the l0th houses hould also be aspected
by its lord and the l0th is alsod isposed in the same nanrrer.
That is, the l0th houseshouldalsobe aspectedb y its lord and
dhouldb e free from malefica spect/occupation.

Brfl(q{T{+qTfq mrG;iq , dTt I
dtagfagal qrcil <rsrrr?{tv ia 4aq rrlrr

3. ShouldA matya karakaa nd the dispositorA tma karaka
be together the nativewill be endowed with great intelligence
and be a king'sm inister.

Notes : Karakendrai s interpretedh ereas the dispositoro f
Atma karaka.SimilarlyAmatyesameansthe dispositoro f Amatya
karaka.

srqriqt6r{+ fqx ! qst qqiqi r
rqdicdtqil zTrfq(r qq;{t rria ptqq nyrl

4. If Amatya karakai s strong and be with a benefico r if
Amatya karakai s in own houseor in exaltationo, ne will surely
'becomcaki ng'sminister.

qq1?qfir(* eri q=qt qqBsfq eil |
<rqlri{t u\ ara} fq<mif qTs?i{q: u{rl

5. Therei s no doubt in one's becominga king's minister
and famousi f Amatya karakai s in the ascendanot r the 5th or
the 9th.

Blftrrtfrttd: *;i 6:|ti ?ilstnirTttR+ |
ail {qiFqrqqa} EnIt} {rqrfart: get rtqrt

6: If Amatya karakaor Amatya karaka be in an angle
or in a trine from the ascendantt he native will beget royal
mercy, royal patronagea nd happinesst hereof.



Chapter fi 40t
fFRfiIEE ifat[S6q Ftctt!-it faqnf,q tt

r i .  \  .
iktrq tt66tT {Itr: ilqrerln:s c qTqir rurr

' 
7. Should malefics be in the 3rd and 6th from Atma

karakaor Arudha Iagna or the natal ascendanto, ne will become
an army chief.

nl{+ hi.rl,ig €{ilS il cri Rqi r
qrqqq gil $ nqq?{} niq qlq rrerr

8. If Atma karaka is in an angle or-in a tride or in
exaltation or in own housea nd be in aspect to the 9th lord,
the nativew ill be a king's minister.

fi'R* Et?Tnwitd qtai quigt r
qfieti flwq)fi54 qni*are inq: rrerr

9. Shouldt he Moon signl ord become Atma karaka and
be in the natal ascendanat long with a benefic, the nativc wilt
become a king's minister at his advanceda ge.

6rr+\ . rguigq* qsqi qtatsR fi r
Evri aqi qrsfr u{ ilEilrs{qq uiq rrlotr

10. Shouldt he Atmakarakab e in the 5th, ?th, loth or the
9th and be with a benefic, one will earn wealth through royal
patronage.

,q rrqsrHqe qfi fird qqlsfq qt r
qrqFFir?uqlrfts{ filcilaq ! nt lrr

I l. If the Arudha of the 9th house be itself the natal
ascendanot r if Atma karaka be in the 9th houset he native wifl
be.associatewdi th royal circles.

qnili Fttrrqrq(t qrqqfirefqqfqtr 
fit<t qtiEt ilrsrftrcq lqTqqrfi ntRtl

12. Onew ill gain throughr oyal associationif  the llth
housei s occupied by its own rord but be devoid of marefic
aspect. The Atma karakas lrourda t the samet ime be conjuncta 
benefic.



' &2 Erlhat Parasara Hora Sastara

iltei trfqqnrd qwti qrqiRqt t
xrd rrorssq;q{ilfisd qRdtfra: tt I I tl

' 
13. An exchangco f signsbetweent he l0th lord and the

ascendaot lord witl make the native associatedw ith the king in
a great manner.

rr<cq giiqnrd fft( faqqnrqI t
q€r wrqfr qt*sd rr*fa6r iqa: ttlvtt

14. If Venusa nd the Moon are in the 4th from Karakamsa
Lagna, the native will be endowedw ith royal insignia.

qfii ltr<ri qlsfq quq*ia iXil I
i?n qili thlt aeq rqfqi qi?i(: llt{ll

15. Should the ascendant tord or the Atma karaka be'
conjunct thc 5th lord and be in an angle or in a trine, the nativo
will bc a king'e minister.

qq fEiqqqq\qlspqtq: llvl tt
Ctepter 4l

CombinationsF or Wealth
Brqr$t: ds{sfq s{A{ ffiq* t
qfeq qli qgilnfr ftfffi ffiqr{ riq rrl rr

l. I nowtellyou ofspecialc ombinationsg ivingwealth.
One born in thesey ogasw ill surelyb ecomew ealthy'

{qt lgnii afrel giut sti t
firi qlta dglt qgr'qet {Tqs: llRll

2. YOGAS FOR GREAT AFFLAENCE (upto sloka 8) :
S h o u l d a s i g n o f V e n u s b e t h e 5 t h h o u s e a n d b e o c c u p i e d
by venush ilmselfw hile Mars isin the llth house, the native
'will obtain gteat richel.



Chapter 4l 403

Notes : This yogaa ppliest o Capricorna nd Geminia scen-
dants alone. For Capricorna scendantV, enus will be in the
5th in own housew hileMars ;vill be in the Ilth in own house.
Similarlyf or Gemini ascendant.S o to say for theset wo ascend-
ants,t be 5th and llth lords in own houseswill conferabundant
riches.

,iql g {utri aRql tut} qfr t
tri tlt g<l ili agaa{et ?Iq6: lllll

3. Shoulda  sign of Mercury be the 5th house and b€
occupiedb y Mercury himself as the llth housei s occupied
by the Moon, Mars and Jupiter,t he nativewill be very affiuent.

Notes : This yoga applies to Aquarius ascendanta nd
Taurus ascendanfto r which Mercury will be in the Sth in own
house. It is quitc superior for Taurus ascendantkeeping
Aquariusn ativei n the next placo. In both cases,J upiterr uling
the llth will be in own housealongwith his friends-the Moon
and Mars.

'efa 
ffi q <fqqii afwl {k{* r
ilr$ qnFgdtqrqt Egrarq ttrlfi: llvll

4. ShouldL eo be the 5th house and be occupiedb y the
Sun himself as Saturn,t he l\z1uoann d Jupiter'arei n the llth,
the nativew ill be verYa ffiuent

Notes .' Here featuresA ries ascendanth avidg the Sun in
the 5th in Leo and Saturn,J upiter and the Moon in the llth
in Aquarius. Please note Saturn occupiest he I lth ao its
owDer.

,iqi g {fqeii afeqa vriaqi qfr r
qrri qPgir*il qgEar€r il$f: ilul

5. Shouldt he Sun and Moon be in the llth as Saturni s
in the 5th identicalw ith his own house, the native will be
very affiuent

.Notes : Saturnw ill be in the 5th in Capricorn for a
Virgo native,and in Aquariusf or a Libra native. The Sun and
the Moon are requiredt o be in the I lth. While beings o,Cancer
or Leo will be the I lth housea s the casem ay be.



N4 '#-"Tor'*o sasra
iqt g gadt arsr 
ili rag,i qt* qgratrq ilqtr: uqtl

6. ShouldJ upitcr bc in the 5th identical with his own
housea s Mercury is in the l lth, the native will be very affiuent.

Notes : Jupiter rules thc 5th for Leo ascendanat nd for
Scorpioa scendantwhile Mercury is the I lth loid for these two
ascendants. Thus thc 5th and llth lordswill be in own

'r igns.

{qtg Sqdi afrqr gnqi efar
ArlTFi lggF g Trrars inrrrFu: etl

7..1f a,c ign of Mars be the 5th with Mars therein as
Vcnus is in thc lltb, the native will becomev ery afluent.

Notes : Canccr and Sagittarius ascendant 
'Mars will attract this

rulc. will be in own housei n the Sth while Venus wilt be
in the I lth in own housef or theset wo ascendants.

{rt g rffit ftq ufngn qftrr 
mf mqfrqi qRfr qgrartrt ilFnrru: qtl

8. If Cancci be the 5th housec ontaining the Moon therein
rg Saturni s in the I lth, the nativew ill becomev ery afluent.

Notes : Here Piscesa scendant is considered with the
Moon in the 5th and Saturni n the I lth.

Thus from slokas2 to 8, the formula that standsf or basic
considerationis  tbat the 5th lord shouldb e in the 5th while
tbc llth lord is in the llth itself. Only in case of the rule
given in sloka 3 for Taurus and Aquarius ascendantst,l o more
planctsh ave beenadded for the I lth housep osition.

qq,nt rn eQ cfiq mg$ grr:I 
ul+{ gew gd ld qrd} !F} q*: rrerr

9 YOGAS FOR WEALTE (upto sloka 15).. Should the
Sun be in Leo identical with the ascCndanta nd be conjunct
or aspectedb y Mars and Jupiter, one will be wealthy.



Chapter 4l 405

wr*"qi ilt aftr1 rrdrgt sft r
1da gwt g{a g€ qrfi F{t niq ttlott

10. Should the Moon be in Cancer identical with ascen-
dant and be conjunct or aspected by Mercury and Jupiter one
will be wealthy.

ffii ri irfi aRq qltq iXi r
etruqtrtF*X* $ r{|qrat uiqrtllrr

ll. ShouldM ars be in the ascendanti dentical with his
own sign and be conjunct or aspectedb y Mercury, Venus and
Saturn, the nativewill be rich.

guriarri ffil ilfrm lq{i efr r
nfffiq$ TG'etr ral ur$ riq rr11rr

12. ShouldM ercury'ssignascendw ith Mercury therein
and be conjunct or aspectedby Saturn aud Jupiter the native
will be rich.

qi"qi qfi aRql gagi qfr r
gunkgi tci Efiqit qa?rF?<u:n tl

13. Should Jupiter be in the ascendanti dentical with
his own sign and be conjunct or aspectedb y Mercury and Mars,
the native will be rich.

qg*eni ifri atrrTq {gti qh r
nfaqlrq{i 1€ a} qnt: Tt wit niq utYtl

14. If Venusb e in the ascendanti dentical with his own
sign and be conjunct or aspectedb y Saturn and Mercury, one
will be wealthy.

nfa*aqi afi Rftqq lrfiqi qft t
dtq gaw t{A {ti qrft ni{a: nt{tt

15. If Saturn is in his own sign identical with ascendant
be aspectedb y or conjunct Mars and Jupiter, the native will be
wealthy.



406 Brihat parasaraH ora Sastra

rc* a{dlilq} t qr ilr$qt tilr r{r! |
ilsq r,rrqrvrmril E?iil ild ivra: rrl qrr

16. OTHER QUALIFIED PLANETS .. The 9th lprd and
th 5th lord are capableo f bcstowing.wealth. Similarly planets
conjuncts ucha  lord. There is no doubt that these planetsw ill
give wealthduring their Dasap eriods.

Notes : The 5th lord and tbe 9th lord are prirnarily
wealth-giversI.f they are well placedi n a horoscopet,h e native
will becomew ealthy. If a favourablep lanet joins thc 5rh lord
or the 9th lord, that planetw ill also becoinea  significator of
wealth.

qgqqrdqltq Trutsqfqlrrqn.l 
ffirrqafd*a sq1,q' fqquet:il t\etl

17. The yogasm entioneda bove( upto sloka 16) shouldb e
delineateda fter knowingf avourableu nfavourablcd ispositionso f
the participantp lanetsa nd their strengthand wcaknesg.

d.a'w: qrRiilitTqtir{r Ekrr qi;qt: I
sti g5q) i{rilr ilgi gaqi{q6' n I e tl
k6ei qiaqr.q: .{r{: qmqaifl* r
($ITtqHl *qali rgqli 'fr{a rr
W{Fi qoE}6 qfrril iq qrqiutetl

18.19.E FFECTS OF ANGULAR LORD'SDIVISIONAL
DIGNITIES.'If the lord of an anglei s in Parijatamsat,h e native
will be liberal, in Uttamamsah ighly liberal, in Gopuramsae nd-
owedw ith prowess,i n Simhasanamshao nourablei,n  Paaravata-
msav alorous,i n Devalokamsah eadof an assemblyi,n  Brahma-
lokamsaa sageand in lravatamsad elighteda nd be celebratedin 
all quarters.

Notes : From verse18 to verse 34 of this chapter,t he
sagei nstructsu s on the dignitieso f the 4 angularl ords and two
trinal lords.

The treatment is bascd on Dasa Varga divisions. For
meaningso f Parijataa nd other Amsas,secc h. 6 supra.S hodasa



Clapter 4l &1

Varga schemea lso can be applied to the rulc given hercin with
suitablem odification proportionately.
' Lords of anglesa re tho.se ruling the ascendaot, thc 4th,
the 7th and the l0th. Their' divisiooal dignities are discusccd
in the presentg roup of verses. One of the said rulers having
various dignities will yield tbllowing effects.

Parijatamsa liberal
Uttamamsa highly liberal
Gopuramsa endowed with prowessa nd manli-

ness
Simhasanamsa honourable( prominent etc.)
Paravatmsa valorous
Devalokamsa head of men, leadcrship,h igh posi-

tion etc.
Brahmalokamsa' sagely( spiritual achievemenBetc.)
Iravatmsa delighted, ever happy etc. and bc

a celebrated personality from all
viewpoints.

Here we must note the implied difrerencebetweent he four
lords ruling the various angles. The angular lords are powerful
and more importint in the ascendingo rder. That is, the 4th lord
is more powerful than the ascendantlord, the ?th lord is so
againstt he 4th lord, and the l0th lord is the most powerful
among the four lords. So the efrectsw ill also increase in thc
sameo rder.

qrRwri qilrqtti fqil *{ gdfrm t
Eni dqqr rin rrl gt Tqiiftil llloll
ftrqqt ilfl qFqr €rfq+{ sqFlttt I
qrrri q firifl ilgfqsT fdtq ! ttRttt
s*i f?rq.trqi nfdqrq crqi t
itrtRtitr rc*6 q|MritttRll

20.22. EFFECTS OF sth LORD'S DIVISIONAL
DIGNITIES .' If the 5th lord is in Parijatamsat,h c nativc will
take to thc branch of learningb efitting his race, if in Uttama+sa
he will have excellent learning, if in Gopuramsah e will rec'
cive world-wide honours, in Simhasanamshae  will be endowed



408 . Brihat parasara Hora Sastra
with ministership, in also paaravatamsa endowed with
knowledgeo f Supreme Spirit; in Devalokamsa he will be a
Yr1o1 Yogi (i.e. a performero f actions, worldly and religious
rites), in Brahmalokamsad evotedt o the Lord and in Iravatimsa
pious.

Notes : While the four angularl ords aret reatedi n onea nd
the sameb reath,t he sage gives speciali mportancet o the sth
and 9th lords individually.T he effectsm ay suitably be under-
stood basedo n the explanationgs ivenf or angularl ordsa bove.

qf{i qrfM d}qiFtqe Errrfr I
Xriv;r;afv *qwt,iF€qlaqifli uRltl
flgi qqsat q qi iqna Er?qli I
@ qiek: Rilril{t fqif?rq: nlytl
u{uaQ qReqaq
qrfiTA q qrtTl trerine q;qfi uR{rr
ggt't qT feauc't lariqqli r icrq: r
rgali rtfiat qrfn Eftqtsrq}qs,u{ Rqtl
qffii q unfmr rari uqT qfqeqfdI 
dkrq: gfiqeral qfi iliit faqlf,c! uR\etl

23.27. EFFECTS oF 9th LoRD,s DIVBI7NAL DIGNI.
TIES : If the 9th lord is in parijatamsat,h e nativew ill visit holy
places,i f in Uttamamsah e had done so in the past births as
well, if in Gopuramsah e rvill perform sacrificialr ites, in simha-
sanamsah e will be mighty, truthful, bc a conquerero f his senses
and will concentrateo nly on the SupremeS pirit giving up all
religions, if in Paaravatamsah e will be the greateso f ascetics,
if in Devalokamsa he will be an ascetic holding a 
(qTS) or a religiousm endicantt hat has renounceda il mu"nuddagneei
attachEentsand carrying three .long staves tied togetheri n his
right ha-nd( filEfq) and if in Brahmalokamsah e *,iil perform
Aswamedha yaga (Horse sacriftce,)a nd will attain the state of
Lord Indra (god of gods). If the 9th lord is in lravatamsat he
personb orn will be a synonym of Dharma or virtues just as
Lord Sri Rama and Yudhishtira (the eldesto f pandavas).



Chapter 4l 409
Notes : The 5th lord has beenp sed in spiritual and mate-

rial planesa s well. Whereasth e 9th lord is solelyr elatedt o onc's
spiritualachievementass  could be seenb y the treatment given
by MaharshPi arasarai n the above5  slokas.

The word Tridandi hasb een translated as above in the
contextof relatingt he native to a Sansyasai s these slokas
exclusivelyconcentrate on the spiritual achievementosf the
native. 'Tridandi'alsom 

 
eanso new ho obtainedc ommando ver

mind, speecha nd deed. Without 'TrikarandS uddhi' or purity
of theset hree it will not be possibtefo r one to achieve Oiuinl
bliss.O ne who thinks bad in his mind though good in the other
two spheres,viz. speechand actions cannotb e calleda  pure
character.Or one who.t hinks of good and speakss imilarlyb ut
actsi n a contrary manner cannot be a successfusl piritualist.
Lastly one who speaksu nd'esirablwe ordst hough good in think-
ing and actingc annotalso reach self realisation. Hence it is
evident that one should be a 'Tridandi' or endowed with
Trikarana Suddhi, -so that he locatest he Almighty at every
point of spacea nd time.

We haveso far seen that 5th and 9th lordsa re primarity
'realth givers. The sagea lsod enotest he 5th and 9th lords as
lords of 'Lakshmi sthanas'.L akshmi though normally means
wealth,furtherc onveysa  meanings plendour (our lustre). Tt i,
relatest o dlvine splendour acquircd by a persont hrough his
iiiritual merits.I f a personi s splendorous,iv e seei n him what
ii called Brrhma Varchrs or the splendour making him look
lite God, free from any material attachment.I ; this context
pe cannot but recall great personagesl ike Rama Krishna
ftrama Hamsa, Maharshi Ramana, Sankaracharyaosf  various
prdersa nd periods, Sivananda and so on aitd so forth. In all
these cases,t he 5th and 9tt lords and 5th and 9th houses
enabledt hem earn that splendour.T he wealth they earned is
such that it cannot be exhausted even after many centuries,
i e. divine status.

fewgwi q M ?q1w*qpqrff anlurq r
cclndrq wrrqrFrtilrrlT: 5ftfar: uRctl

28. ANGULAR AND TRINAL LORDS RELATED : Tho
anglesa re known as Vishnusthaan(ai. e. houseso f Lord Vishnu)
while the trines are called Lakshmi sthaanas( i.e. houses oi



410 Brihat Porasara Hora Sastd

Lakshmi). If the lord of an angle establishesrelationshipw ith a
trinal lord, a Rajayogaw ill obtain.

Notes : The 4 houses,viz. the lst, 4th, ?th and l0th are
known as Vishnusthaanawsh ile the 5th and ahd 9th are l-aksh-
misthaanasI.n  Hindu mythology, Lakshmi is a consortof Lord
Vishnu,t he supremeg od.A  relationshipth usb etweena n angular
lord and a trinal lord is capableo f causinga  superiorRajayoga,

just as bne having the blessingosf  Sri Vishnu and His consort
Lakshmiw ill be endowedw ith permanenwt ellbeing.

The kinds of relationshipb etweenp lanets that will be
favourableare :

l. An exchangeb etweent heset wo tords.
2. Mutual aspectsb etweenth eset wo lords.
3. Conjunctionof theset wo lords.
4. Mutual angularp lacemenet xistingb etweenth eset wo.
5. Mutual trinal placemenbt etweenth eset wo.
The first three kinds of relationshipsa re more powerful

while the last two cannot be equally powert'ul but in a lesser
degree.

A sixth kind of relationshipc an also be extendedin  this
contextt o Navamsa positionst houghI  have no specific iassic
sanctionf or this. For examplein a Capricornian'sc ase, Mars in
the Navamsao f.Venusa nd Venusi n that of Mars will confer a
superiorR aja yoga. This form of relationshipw ill be eqally
superior like the first 3 relationships mentioned by me in thc
earlier paragraph.

After seeingsuch a relationship between an angular lord
and a trinal lord, their dignities like Parijatae tc. will havet o bc
Eeent o dccidet he extent ofeffects due as could be seen in the
following six verses.

qf(qfi ftqal al iqfi flwgtan: r
sf,n qlaql {q} qw{TfilfifEqq rrRerr
,ftgi iq{Tt{v: {Pdrift'r{ir i*q r
R{6sa q{iqfr eriqfemrcr: uQotl
qftr1 di qRru;s] qy{fr6tt6qr 1
Ttq{{qrit qm€ilqrt qfiqftrt: trl ttl



Chupter 4l 4 l l

qtqr{qq qrd€fisn (til gfuftor: r
qf-{dr qnkqr€rudrriq faqqaq ! ttlRrr
fl{IEai{r*st}€i qftrr rFclf<rcaqt t
fqcufr: eisqalftq qrq€ ?qelfii nQltl
cqdd it T(trar ilq;fr fqsqqrilfi1; 1
Qqrfiiqr* trra: g{ raniy} qg: n1Ytl

. 
29.34 EFFECTS OF DIVISTONAL DIGNITIES OF THE

TWO PLANETS SO RELATED .' Should an angular lord
and a trinal lord having sucha relationship(v idea bove slokas)
be in Parijatamsat,h e native will be king and will protect men,
if Uttamamsah e will be an excellentk ing endowed with eleph-
ants,h orsesc, hariotse tc , if in Gopuramsah e will be a tiger of
kings honouredb y othcr kings,a nd if in Simhasanamshae  wil!
be an emperorr uling over the entireearth; with the said Raja-
yogar elationshipo f the saidp lanetsi n Simhasanamswae reb orn
HaiischandraM, anu, Bali, the Firc god (Agni Deva)a nd many
otlrer emperors. In the present Yugaso born is Yudhishtira( or
Dharma Raja of Maha Bharata). Salivahana's birth and that of
otherswill qlso comew ith thisy oga. With thesep lanetss o related
and in PaaravatamsaM, anu etc. were born. The Incarnationso f
Lord Vishnu took placew hent he said planets,b eingso related,
uere in Devalokamsa;a nd in BrahmalokamsaL ord Brahma
and in Iravatamsat he SwayambhuManu (the first of the 14
Manus identified as the second creator who produced the
Prajapatis and to the said Manu the code 'of laws yiz. Manu-
smriti is ascribed)w ereb orn.

Notes : The two planets,v iz. anangularl ord and a trinal
lord with such a relationship, should be simultaneouslyi n
Parijatamsa.O ne in Parijatamsa nd the other in a still higher
Amsa will yield still better effects.T he roader can intelligently
manipulatet he effectsac,cordingto  such Am'sas.

When studyingt hese slokas,w e reacha crucial point as
to the period of Parasara. There a1e baselessa rguments that
Parasaraa, uthor of Brihrit Parasara Hora, could not be a sage
that hved thousandso f yearsa go; bur a very recent author tnat
shouldh avel ived after Varaha Mihira, Bhattotpala, Kalyana
Yarma and so on and so forth. This misconception does not



4t2 Brihat ParasaraH ora Sastra
deservea n answera t all and is worth beingb rushed asidea s an
idle gossip. The holderso f sucho pinion may advancea  million
argumentsin  their own favour. Our query to them is: which
exponentr eferred to the horoscopicp ositionso f Lord Vishnu,
HarischandraM, anu, Bali ChakravarthiA, gni Deva,S wayambhu
Manu and last but not the least the Creater Brahmat rimself? 
Is it humanlyp ossible,b ut for a sage, with divine contacts,
to producec ombinationse xistingi n the sacred horoscopeso f
Vishnu, Brahmaetc.?Also note with specifica ttentiont he state-
ment of Parasarat hat "Dharma Raja (the eldest son of king
Pandu, of Maha Bbarata)of the present oge,h as this yoga".
Does this not stand as an indisputablet estimony of Parasara
having lived in the Maha Bharatae ra ?

Yet, another clue about Parosarais  servedw heni n the
'"awbiollv el inesw e find his prediction that Salivahana and others

be born" with this yoga. The verb used is bhavita in
future tense. That conveyst hat Parasaraw as a predecessoro f
Salivahana nd not a successoorf  Bhattotpalae tc.

MaharshiJ aimini,author of PoorvaM imamsaand propag-
ator of Jaimini Astrologyw asa discipleof ParasaraI.f  Parasara
lived in the lTth century,w hat aboutJaimini ?

Specifica ttentiono f the reader is drewn to the statement
of Parasarain  ]sloka 32above,t o the effectt hat "in the present
Yuga" Dharma Raja is born with sucha yoga.T his is an ample
proof that our sagew asi n Maha Bharata time and was the
illustriousp arento f illustriousVedaV yasa.

Lastly,t he following popular quotation enlists Parasart
amongt he l8 exponentso f Jyotisha: 

q4: frcreql aqm) qffisfa crrsn : I '
ficc] {Tts} TqTq ttfsfg<rfl<: tt
qlq{r: qlqsrs'iq iqqq} qfi} qg; I

s's vfrfil:sntax fiitT: it
This is again a proof that our sage was indeed a sageof

Mahabharatae ra and is an authority with crown for Kali ypga
sstrology.



qq ErRruq\rrtsrltqulyRu
C:hapter4 2

Combinations For Periury
qqql qrcr *qr larcaal nn gi ! t
qfrcq-.rr<t{q}qq Eiqqrf t'qq m}! rrqrr

l. O Lord, you haves tatedmaiy yogas rnlatedt o acqui-
sition of wealth. Please tell me such yogas causing utter
poverty.

qQri q aqqrqi qlqi iltqrqi t
rndvqd gd frd* qrqi ;rt: uRtl

2. The nativewill be pennilessif  the ascendantl ord is in
the l2th as the l2th lord is in the ascendanta long with a
Maraka lord (death inflicting planet) or be in aspect to such a
planet.

wN qsaqr** qEEt "cFaqrri I
qn*ir qqEd qEQH: silqi rrlrr

3. The nativew ill be pennilessif  the ascendantl ord is in
the 6th while the 6th lord is in the ascendanwt ith conjuntion
or aspect of a Maraka lord.

q . \ ( \ da{qffil il"t fiq{ q* r
9  

qr(6ntif a s  \  a  A  G  r

{6i qrf,} q 'frEir} qia rrvu
3 \

4. Shouldt he ascendanot r the Moon be with Ketu whilt
the ascendant lord is in the 8th, the person cencernedw ill br
penniless.

qcarstq-"qqrli ,, qrqt qrqiti I
si* frgi t't'i (q?irdlfsqf rtia: rrrrr

5. If the ascendanlto rd along with a malefici s in the 6th,
8th or l2th while the 2nd lord is in an enemy'ss ign or in debili-
tatton, evena  native of royal scionw ill becomep enniless.



414 Brihat Parasara Ilora Sastra.

fHria qqrqd qrq<ra fqq,at I
vrfnqtisqql qiri(Eui fqeicl Ftr:n !,tl

' 
6. If the ascendanlto rd is conjunct an evil housel ord (one

of the 6th,8th and l2th lords)or Saturna ndh edevoido fbenefic
aspectt hc nativew ill be penniless.

w*w) q{arqqq fiqq qcaEqqRqa}| 
EEel *qn*{it fidq} qri ?r: uerl

7. S\ould the 5th and 9th lords be respectivelyf oun.l in
the 6th and 12tha nd be in aspectt o Maraka planetstoh e native
will be penniless.

nce Frrilqi TlEquctfuql fscr ! r
qn+{Tqt i[Gd qril: sf'qria] uiq ttet t

8. If malefics,e xieptingt he lords of the l0th and 9th, be
in the ascendanitn  associationw ith or aspect o Marakap lanets,
one will becomep enniless.

fa*m qi qrq(fi aqurinrftaqfrqar:I 
. qtq$atiTr 

Tift 3:<{r6rfl{ir finia: rrerr
9. Note the planets ruling the signsoccupiedb y the lords

of 6th,8th and l2th. lf the said dispositorsa re in such evil
housesin turn and be associatewd ith or aspected by malefics,
the nativewill be miserablea nd indigent

qqrrrnqqi*{if rmtnla} qR r
qn$wilqql qilsq qrds? fqrhl ?r: n{otl

: 10. The lord of the Navamsao ccupied by the Moon
joining a Maraka planeto r occupyinga  Maraka housew ill make
one penniless.

qriq|qrffd{rl ftss$srrRrft qfEr 
rr<iqal qca} qnlss't fid* il:utttl

ll. Shouldt he lord of natal ascendanat nd that ofNava-
msa ascendantb e conjunctor be aspectedby Maraka planets,
one will be penniless.



F
Chdpte4r 2 415

'{{rFcrFrril: 
,rntt|i qrqFqFrrflI: {rql: I

-freial arTqi qtql qlqin qt'lfla: ntRrt
12. If inauspicioushousesa re occupied by beneficswhile

auspicioush ousesa re, occupiedb y malefics, the native will bc
indigenta nd will be distresseedv eni n the mattero f food.

n'lutnEfirqln l faid: dgar u€r:I 
i q{ Firq66 qr€Ifr{rr: (IiTl: n l ltl

}.
. 13. A ptaneta ssociatedw ith one of the lordsof the 6th,

I 8th and l2th, beingb erefto f a trinal lord's aspect,w ill in its
Dasap eriodsc auseh arm to the native's financiala spects.

t,rffirqen f{qqq qI <?riRG faqt€qtt
fiffirfrqql$?rqt arflr: ffirte utvtl

14. If the 8th/l2th frorn Atmakarakao r from the natal
alcendant be aspectedb y Atmakaraka Navamsa lord and the
natal ascendantlo rd, the native will be bereft of wealth.

tntn] earir awq qriqr] qr;Rilqqt I
dtai iqdiil qrq] zqq{tq}v iE4alllqttl

15. The native will be a spendthrift if the l2th from
Atmakarakai s aspectedb y the dispositor of Atmakarala or
if the l2th from the natalascendanits  aspectedb y the ascendant
lord.

b qq arfrava'frriq sq{rfr wlgsl1 I
uaftq] g rftqrsi 6fqa] air;rnrftl lltqll
gdlaal cErki g{a} qT" dqrqrt 
fr:Aai grei aa <fqffff q*fqn: tlt\ell
quqqtii (qd qrftrErE!r ttml r
nfr{qrfq €icaut qq*t lqie,fr ntctl

16-18. N<-'wI tell you somey ogasf or povertya long with
conditionso f their nullifications.S hould Mars and Saturnb e
together in the 2nd house,t he native's wealth will be destroyed.



4t6 Brihat ParasaraH ora Sasfta

ShouldMcrcury aspett he saidt wo planetsi n the 2nd, therewill
be greatw ealth.T herei s no doubti n it. The Suni n the 2nd in
aspect o Saturnw ill causep enuryw hile the Sun so placed if
be not aspectedb y Satumw ill give richesand fame. The same
effects( i.e. poverty)b e dcclaredif  Saturn is in the 2nd in aspect
to the Sun.

srsTrlEtqpqrqtf:v 8t f, 
Chaptcr43

Longevity
q?TTqitaq*ql q nfqal $Tftn qi t I

'?r{T0tlqqq] ilri .6e&Kqq wril lrrlrr
l. O Sage, you havedealtw ith combinationsf or wealth

and poverty.K indly detailmethodso f ascertainingthe life span
of humanbeings.

sT{ I6i ?{fl fEq ! qini a f!fuqur r
FqqrsrTr{q} ild $td qq gifq ilRil":
mgatfaiarcg agft{gu}Rar: 
ftqi qrciflqrqllt nr{rfq ilemqa:t tltl

2-3. O Brahmin,f or the benefit of mankind I narrate
methodso f ascertainingl oogevity,a s knowing longevityi s diffi-
cult evenf or gods. Many exponentsh ave laid down various
pethods of longevityc alculationsF. ollowing is the summaryo f
suchs choolso f thoughts.

Notes : Slokas 2-15 dealwith Pindayu systemof longevity
calculationsA. fter dealing with translation of these14 slokas,
the entiresystemo f Pindayu is beingf ully explainedb y me with
a practicale xamples o that,the readerf ollows the calculations
involvedt horoughly.



Chapter 43 417

rqltqqtqrk-iftrrar t6t 3TtlJ:ttittttrFlI: 
€-drq{hiq*fl?i ilr"Tfur it Tmq: nvtl
fqostq: qq{ ilx qfr{aawq1 t
m'qqfq fas'i$ t arqeiqilfqrrq: llul
s{q qqtfr€tg ?q€q}iq€qrqtfsq{t 
i;e;{-tFtt€{fqarftaqqJsot: trialq: tlQll
r5,iql tqnfarqr<t q:ftour: qdfril: t
{lqfe}ilEd=a iid qAEFItit llsll
??[iq{A} ilQ: {t'tcq: qc.qrfri rrfusFn( |
e&oerjfwa) q{il} qtfaqfia qRRI: llsll

+8. PINDAYU: The planetsc ontribute longevitya ccord'
ing to their being in exaltati,ono r debilitation,. anda lso based
on- th.i, strengihs and weaknessesa nd positions in Aswini
etc. and in thi various signs. First of all Pindayu, based 91
thc planetary positions- O brahmin, listen to wbat I say, with
singGmindednessl.g , 25, 15, 12,15,2 l and 20a rc the numper
of lears contributed by the planetsf rom the Sun etc' when in

'
iawp) exaltation. Thesr are half of the above in (deep)
iall, and if the planetsare in betweene xaltationa nd fall, rule of
three process should be used, Deduct the actual positi<'no f
the planetf rom its deepe xaltationp oint. Ifthe product'is less
than Os igns,d educti t againf rom 12 signs. The produdtconcer-

ned be multipliedb y the numbero f yearsallotted to the planet

and dividedb y 12 to get the planet'sactualc ontribution'

qFf,qq 6iruerd ffir {|Tq|i{qi I

f, E{itrr fsqr nid rt{ffil tq qt: lle'll
g, RECTIFICATIONS Exccpting Venus and Saturn'

"
the contributionsm ade by oth erss houldb e halved'i f they are

by the Sun. One third should be reducedi f the
""iipr"O, 
il;il-it in i,, lnitiral sign' This does'nota pply to the one in

retrogression( seev aLra charam)'

sqq rt: I
EqqrEd frcrd: qTq]q\ tltwE rgq{ llloll



4 1 8 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastta

qri g rUEd €tnrrhi qilt {E: I
ilrs" eilq?q irrrs qrq?{ig fnf\: TrRrqi lt I tl

IO-II. DEDUCTIONS FOR PLANETS IN YISIBLE
HALF .' Full, half, one third, one fourth, one fifth and one
sixth are the deductionsof contributions made by malefics
placedi n the visibleh alf of the zodiac.B eneficsin  suchc aseslose

,'onlyh alf of what maleficsl ose. Should there be more than one
planeti n a house, the deductiond ue to the strongestw ill only
prevaila nd not due to other planetsi n that particular house.
WaningMoon is a beneficf or this purpose.

qrriufqfqn r Fqr s*ri fqqrr$r r
qtvfi qwqfqrdrfrditi qqtf( nlatq ulRtl
Tqql qr{i q{ cg.n q rirqi r
mri gndld qrdt{ Bqwf,q t rr11rr

12-13.M ALEFICS IN ASCENDANT : In casethea scen-
dant ig occupiedb y malefics,adopt the following procedure: 
Convert the ascendant'ss phutai nto minutes of arc and multiply
it by the years etc. contributed by the occupanta nd divide by
21600.T he yearse tc. so arrived be deductedf rom the respective
coptributionw hich will be the net spandonated by the planet.
If thcre is benefic's aspecto n the ascendanct ontainingm alefics,
thcn the lossi s only half (obtainedt hrough these calculations).

qr{(Tf{t(qnqt€f qmRiTgqrtr(:I 
qrflRrrr lfr"gf.il Frrn1:* sfr dfq{r: trtvtl
criterdfsnl1e4: Tqrrf,i iTrqfrnrfi: I
nf,ill wiglil rfwger{ q rrTfqi u l {tl

l+15. ASCEN.DANT'S CONTRIBATION.. The number
ofyearscontributedb ythe ascendantw ill correspond to the
numbero f signs it gained( from Aries) while the degreest he
ascendangt ainedi n the particular sign will alsocorrespondingly
donate (i.e. 30 degrees:l year). If the NavamsaA scendani
lord is strongert han the ascendanlto rd, then the contribution
be computed only bascd on the Navamsas gained (from



Chapter 43 4t9
Aries),o therwiset he corhputationw ill be for the Rasia scendant
only.

Notes : The sevenp lanetsf rom the Sun to Saturnr espec-
tivelyc ontribute1 9,2 5,lS, 12, lS,2l and2 0y earsw heno n jeep
exaltationd egree.'  The contributionsa re just halvedw hent hese
are on deepd ebilitationd egreesT. he deep exaltationd egreesfo r
the 7 planets respectivelyfr om the Sun on are : Aries 10,,
Taurus3 ", Capricorn2 80, Virgo 15", Cancer 5", pisces2 ?;
and Libra 20'. By adding 1g0", to the said degrees,* " 
deepd ebilitationpoints !"t

for the concernedp raneis.i Mter fin'a-
ing out the individual contributions of spano f rongevitLi [e
samea re to be rectified which method is being explainid in
appropriate place in the following paragraphs. To work out
the longevitvt hrough pindayu method, we-will iakc up the
horoscopeo f a male born on 2l.S.tg44a t l9h Olm l5s (Wf) ut
13N40 79F.20. The Rasi and Bhavac harts as reuqiredf or 
purpose ou

a 
r

re :

Merc
Moon
Ven

Mars
Jup

Rahu



420 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

Moon
Ven
Sun

Mars
Rahu

The plarretary longitudesi n the respective signs as per
Lahiri Ayanamsa( 23'4'12')a re : The Sun 7-12'18, the Moon
27-35-46,M ars 6-18'46, Mercury l+54-13, Jupiter 26'7-13,
Venus2 7:17-50,S aturn3'9-41a nd ascendan0t -48'34.The bhava
startingp ointsa re : lst-Libra l5-48-15,2nd-Scorpiol 5-48-15,
3rd-sagittarius I 5-47-394, th-Capri corn | 5- 4 7- 2, 5th-Aquari-
us l5'47-1, 6th-Pisces l5-47-38,7 th-Aries l5-48-15,8 th-
Taurus l5-48-15 , 9th-Gemini l5-47-38,l 0th-Cancer 15'47-1,
llth-Leo l5-47'l and Virgo 15'47'38.

Basedo n the sage'sin structionsw, e may device the follo-
wing simplea nd commonf ormula to know the numbero f years
contributed by any of the 7 planets.( All concernedlongitudes
should be convertedi nto decimals. The minutesand secondsbe
also considered.F or example,2 11 32'49" is converted into
21.347 degreesf or easy calculation.) The formula to find out
the basicp lanetaryc ontribution is :

. l. If "d" is lesst han 180ot,hen"c"
- f - ( d x f + 3 6 0 )

f
,  2.  I f  "d" is abovet go' ' " ' -  I  

3* 



42r
Where "d" is distanceb etween the ptanet's deepe xalta'

tion degreea nd its actual placement;" f" is the full number
of yearsgrantable by the planet-a nd 'c' is the basic years
actuallyg rantedby it due to its placement.

Take Sati.rrn'sc asea s an exarnple. He can at bestcontri-
bute 20 years. In the horoscope under evaluation, he is
223.1613d egreesa way.  froin his deep exaltation (Libra 20').
Hence to find out the basicso ntribution of Satuin, rle use
rule 2 above,t hus :

-  -2--2l630. 1 6 1 3X  ) i
-

On this basis,w e havef or the examplen ativity,t he follow-
ing baSicd onationso f yearsb y the 7 planets: 

The Sun 17.5642y rarc
The Moon 24.6247 yeus
Mars 8.4036y ears
MercurY 6.9968y ears

- 
JuPiter 14.1200

' Y  ears
. Venus 19.2327Y ears

Saturn 12.3979Y ears

These basic'contributionsw ill ondergo the following
reductionsa, s aPPlicable

l. Astangatal1 rarana'2S. atru KshetraH arana3 . Vyayadi
Harana4 . KroorodayaH arana. Thesemay be understoodfr om
the following ParagraPhs.

l. AstangataH arana : If a pianet is combust reduce
the spanb y half. However,t his docs not affect Venus and
Saturni n combustion.

2. Sahu Kshetra Hrrana : If a planet is in its enemy's
sign,r educeo ne third of the basic years and take only two
third. An exceptioni s that a retrograde planet, although
placedin inimical sign,d oesn ot incur this liability. 'Vakrachara'

 
is ttree xpressionm ade by Maharshi Parasaraand hencei t
exceptsa  retrogradep lanet. Mars alsod oesl ose io an enemy's
sign. Necdlestso  mention, a planeti n netural's sif', (or in
frlnd's sign)i s not subjectqdto  this reduction.

3. VyayadiH arana:  Planetse ntail reductioni f placeda ny'
whereb etweenth e l2th and 7th (reckonedin descendingo rder)'



422 brihat parasaraH ora Sastra
This needn ot be mistakent o be Drisyardha Hani. Drisyardha
meanst hat half of the zodiacw hich is visible. Hencei t is lg0.
behind the ascendentacl usp,i .e. upto deicendantv ia meridian.
Vyayadi Haranaf igures are : full, half, l/3, ll4,lli and l/6h
accordingt o the planetb eingi n l2th, llth, l0th,9th, gth and
7th. These are for maleficp lanetsw hite a beneficin  this con-
nection loses only half of what is notcd for a malefie. The
Moon is ever a benefic for longevity calculations, as. per
Maharshi Parasara. (Mercury although joining a malefic be
treated as a benefic only, lbr all longevityc alculations.) We
find heret hat therei s harmonicp rogressionin  thesed eductions
and hencewe ought to havea  scientifica nd logical approach to
the quantunro f correction,r athert han resortingt o a flat check
arbitrarily. There is no justificationi n straightawaye liminating
the whole,f or example,f or a malefici n the l2th not giving heed
to his actualdegreewispel acement.I t.should be full at the l2th
bhavae ndingp oint, poroprtionatelyle sso n the l2th cusp and
still lessero n thc beginningp oint of l2th bhava or Ilth bhava
ending point. That is, starting with a l00f lesso n the l2rh
bhava ending we gradually arrive for a50/" reductiona t the
point where the llth bhava ends.. Thus it will be one sixth
reduction at the ond of 7rh bhavawhile it will be l/7th at the
beginaingo f the 7th bhava (or end of the 6th bhava). The
reductiono btainedby this methodshould bc half in the case of
a benefic( i.e. Jupiter,"VdnusM, ercury and the Moon). With-
out going through any difficult process,f or each bhava, a
common formula is given with which one can rectify the basic
contributionso f a planeti o one of thesehouses.
Thc formula is :

t c t

(14-House)- :loss 
 (oe+tsL) of years

(DP:Distance of planet from bhava start; BL:Bhava
length and 'House' is the bhavaoccupiedby the planetu nder
re{tific8tion.

To understandt his forftula, we will rectify Saturn's
contribution He is in the 8th bhava and hence attracts
tbis reduction. He is in Gemini 3-9-41 whilet he 8th house
beginsi n Taurus at 15-48-15a nd endsa t 15-47-38i n Gemini.
Tbus the lengthof the 8th hhavai s 29-59-33o r 29.9925d egrees,
which is' 'BL' for our purpose. Tbe basic contribution of



Chapter 43 423

Saturn is 12.3979y ears. He is l7,3i72degreeraheadoft hc
8th bhavab eginning. Thcrefore,h is reduction is :

12 3979 :2.2869 years

Thus, on accdunt of Vyayadi Harana, Saturn entailsa 
check of 2.2869 yezrs. In the example horoscope, Mercury is
not liablc to this reductiona s he is quite prior to tho beginoing
of the 7th bhava. others that attract this check arc : Thc sun,
the Moon, Venus, Mars and Jupiter. The figures for these
planetsb asedo n the presentf ormula are :

Venus (7th bhava) : 1.4533y ears
The Sun (7th bhava) z 2.7939y earc
The Moon tTth bhava) : 1.8636y ears
Satqrn (8th bhava) : 2.2869y ears

.Vlars (9th bhava) z 1.9472y ears
Jupiter (lOth bhava) : 1.9314y ears

4. Kroorodaya Harana : Only malefics( i.e. Saturn, the
S,rn and Mars) entail this check if in the ascendant.
Mercury,t hough joining a natural maleficw ill not be liablet o
this reduction. We do not requiret his rcductiont o any planet
in the example horoscope, as there is nonei n thg ascendant.
Here the ascendantm eans the area betweenth e startinga nd
ending points of the sign rising. To find out this reduction,
tte ascendentacl usp in degrees, minutes and seconds be
,multiplied by the number of basicy earsd onatedb y the malefic
concerneda nd divided by 21600. The divider is 21600a s these
are the total minutes of arc in the zodiac. The figure so arrived
should be reduced from the said malefic'sbasicc ontribution.
However, if a benefica spectsth e said malefic, reduce only balf
of the figure so suggested

5. We have thus seenf our typei of reductions. At every
stage the reduction should not be done instantaneously. After
obtaining the reduction figures, whereverp ermitted,c heck up
if there is more than one reduction for one and the same planet
under various headings. The following may be rememberedin 
this connection.

(a) If a planet attracts more rnan one rednction, thc
highest reduction is only to be done ignoring the orhers. For



424 Brihat parasara Hora Sastra
exampfea, ssumeM ercury attractsa  reduction of 7.5y earsd ue
to rule, l, folloived by 2.3 yearsd ue to rute 2 anOi .3S yearir
due to rule 3. The highest reduction is due to rute i and
hence only 7.S is to be deducteda nd the other two figuresb e
ignored in toto.

(b) In case of Vyayadi Harana (rule 3), two or three
plancts may be in one bhava. In that case,the strongeslto ses
and the other (or others)will not lose.

Not only the planets, but the asbcndanta lso grantsa 
certainnumbero f years. This figures houlda lsb bc found out
before adding to the planetary contributions. To know the
the number of years granted by the asccnclanfti,r stlyn ote the
numbero f signsi nterveningb ctweenA ries ancl the sign before
the ascendant.T hat is, if Sagittariusis  tlrc asccndantc, ount
upto Scorpio beginningf rom Arics. This dcnotesg  years.
The degreesin the ascendanbt e also proportionatcly convertcd
into years treating 30 degrcesa s one year,o 'month. r ,2.5d egreesa s a

The contributiqno f asccndanwt ill bc so calculatedi f
the asccndanltord is strongert han the NavamsaL agnal ord.

In case the Navamsa Lagna lord is stronger than his
cotrnterpart,a  different computationi s to be rcsortedt o, thus.
Count from Aries till you rcacha  sign beforcN avamsaL agna.
In the case under study, the NavamsaL agnal ord, Moon, is
strongert han the ascendanltord. Hencew e cqmpute Navamsa
Iagna's contributionf or our own use. The NavamsaL agna is
Cancer. Hencef rom Aries to Cancerw e havet hrec cornpleted
Navamsasw hich give 3 year. The ascendingd egreei s 0-4g-34
whereaso nb Navamsai s 3" 20'. Proportionatelyt hus we get
another0 .2428y earsa nd havet he total contribution of 3.242g
years 8s Ascendant'sc ontribution. In caseo f Navamsatr eat
3" 20' as one full year. ' The ascendanr'cso ntributionu nder-
goes no check.

Now we are ready for 'There 
final reductions. are

3 planetsin  the 7th house,v iz. tbe Sun,t he Moon and Venus.
.The Sun is the strongest and hence Vyayadi Harna(rule 3)
appliest o only the Sun while venusa nd the Moon are'rid of
reduction on this score. The Sun is in enemy,sc ampa nd on
tbis scoreh e losesa  third of 17 5642w, hich reduction is equal
to 5,854i. This figurei s higher thant he one obtained for the



Chapter 4i 42s
Sun as per rule 3 (i.e. Vyayadi Harana). Hence his final
contributiontu rnst o be 11.7095y ears (ie. basicy ears minus
Satru kshetra Harana). In the matter of Vyayadi Harana
(rule 3) there is no other bhavaw heret herei s more than one
planet.

Though the Moon has not lost on account of rule 3
(VyayadiH arana),s hei s liablet o reduction on account of her
combustion( rule l). Thus rvhenh er basiccontribution( 24627,
is halved,s hei s left with a net donationo f l2 3124y ears.

Except the Sun, no other planet is in enemy'ss ign. So,
Satru KshetraH arana( rule 2) doesn ot apply to others. Now
the final contributionsm ay be notedas below :

Planet Basicy rs. Reduction Reason Net yrs.

Sun t7.5642 l l3rd Rule 2 l1 .7095
Moon 24.6247 l l2 Rule I 12.3124
Mars 08.4036 9th bhava Rule 3 06.4564
Mcrcury 06.9968 Nil 06.9968
Jupiter t4.1200 l0th bhava Rule 3 l2 . r8 86
Venus t9.2327 7th bhava exempted t9.2327
Saturn t2.3979 8th bhava Rule 3 l 0 . lr l 0
Lagna 3 2428

Total : 822502

Thesey earsa re in Savanaman(a3 60 days a year) as we
have used 360' of tbe zodiac. To apply this to Gregorian
calendar, we have to convert the same into SauramanaB. y

'simply multiplying the said figure by. 0.9856034,we can get
Sauramana. Thus in the caseo f our. example, we arrive at a
net longevityi n Sauramana s 81.06y ears.

The dasa period so obtained are Pinda Dasa of the
7 planetsa nd the Lagna.I l the Sun is strongesitn the horoscope,
effectsc an be worked out on PindaD asamethod.



426 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

Br{rf qr ! fqsqtq: dnqi t'qqTwr{ql 
q?rr€fataqrci{rTtqt $qsft:Efiri lt!,tl
(sari6aq{r eg{: 5fa: tarn}a Q r
sr?rr;6,r6{rcET E ifl Enn*ar fqqfer: ilt\etl

16-17 NISARGAYU.O.  Brahmin,n ow I  tel l  you about
Nisargayu7 , ,2,9,20,18,20 and5 0aret hey earsa l lot tedto  the
Moon, Mars,M ercury,V enus,J upitert he Suna nd Saturnf rom
the period of birth.

Notes:  Except giving the number of yearsa pplicableto 
Naisargayut,here is no other mentiona bout rectificatione tc. in
our versiona s wellasi n thatof ChaukambhSa anskriSt ansthana.
However,we heve somem orei nstructionisn  thc versiong iven
by Thakur Prasad Pustak Bhandar. Thc rclevantp ortion is as
under :

e{{rsffirfEqi efafrsrq: qe'+TaE I
q{ ftry ftqrrTi.qi rfrlfla: Xei+qrr 

This conveyst o us that the yearsd ehoted for thc planets
are whent hey are in deepe xaltetion. Thcse are halveda t.deep
debilitation. Then the rectilicationasr et he samea s applicable
to Pindayu. So to sry, the four kinds of reductions uggested
for Pindayu be performed for Nisargayu as well. Ascendant
also contributes in Nisargayu. The method of its contribution
in Nisargayuis  also the sameas secni n Pindayus cherne.

srqts{nq cFfftTr;fi <iarat 6'EqrFq€{ |
mivnfvqearft €al qqlfqr qiqfil utqtl
mF< rq_ric ri: qfi{cer iT{qrronf{s{ |
F?flsfqifqn imaaruvnXe: rr6a{ ulerr

18-19.AMSAIU: Now about Amsayu contributionsb y
the ascendanat nd planets. The yearsc orrespondto  the number
of Navamsasc ounted from Aries. Multiply the longitudei n
questionb y 108. If the product exceeds1 2,e xpunger nultiples
of 12 and consider the final product in Rasi, degreese tc-a. s
tr".r:months etc.



Chapter4 3 427

Notes : The 7 planets and the ascendantc ontribute to
longevitya s per Amsayurdhayam ethod basedo n the Navamsas
covered. 3" 20' longitude equals one year. Thus the basic
contributionsc an be workedo ut as per the exampleg ivenf or the
Lagna'sl ongitudei n theP indayus cheme.S imilarunderstanding
canb e exterrdedto  planetaryl ongitudes.T he basiccontributions
thus found out be rectifiedi n the samem anneras explainedf or
Pindajayu. The .sage puts forth a different suggestiona s
enunciatedb y another school of thougl,t in regard to recti'
ficationof Amsayr:,i n the following slokas: 

fqosrtRs a?Tfq Aft gqh feqqsl: t
sr"r$rt ffiqlsfq" *fnq( fa*taqa: uQoll
mfuarg:q i eqld €d qr fagi TTa{ |
Gtof Ta{qt{€ai €i66tui m}nt llRtll
gqq? q* di 6d feytle 

" Q t
qrfraisdqrfa:'eqrRusrqr5: d $lq tlllrl

20-22. The .same'r educlions as per Pinda.yua pply to
Amsagua r wcll; i e. half for a combust planelonc third for
in;micalp lacementa nd the onesd uef or placcrrrenitns  the half
of the zodiaccountedf rom the l2th backwards. Somescholars
suggesfturther correctionsf or Amsayu, viz. to increaseth ree-
fold the contribution of a planeti n exaltationo r in own house
and double the contribution if the contributor is in his own
Navamsao r in own decanate. If doubling and trebling is
warranted, only trebting be done. In caseo f reductionsa lso,
only halvingi s to be donei f both halvinga nd reducinga third
are required. That is how the final life span of men be
urderstood.

Notes:  Rectification of Amsayub e done, takingt he basic
contributionsa s detailedb elow.

(a) Treble the basicy earsi f the planeti s exaltedor in own
sign.

(b) Double if in own Navamsao r own decanate.
(c) Among 'a' and 'b'. if both are neededo nly 'ani s to be

effected.



428 Brihat Parasaro Hora Sastra
(d) No clear instructions are found about halving the

contribution or castingo ff a third Harving,h owever,o bvTousty
applies to a debilitatedp ranetw hile rosso i a third part appties
to a planeti n inimical sign. In the matter of deductioou, rro,
only halving is to be effectedi f both reductionsa re requirJ
for one and the samep lanet.

qE risrrq qr;iqi 
qi qnqqr$ FriEE;rr( Tir{qqqgqIr 

q frr emq,r ue q+( ttRlu,,
23. LONGEVITY FOR OTHER LIVTNG BEINGS.. For

other living beingsa s rvcil suchc omputationsb e made. The said
figure be multiplicdb y the figurec orrespondingto  its full spano f
life and divided by thc rigure corrcspondingto  ruil span'oilie
for humanbeings.

qeilq: qTgi qEeqtt qrflqrft€ggrq{ 
I r

3{Trf,i<ri iqrarqq'luri qEt f
e Gaq)lwnnq t  rrrRvrr

rJalqo-qruqier-uqfqi q €(€16{ |
Itq-qnr-TdnTfi-qos.Frat {ritTrrTirl R{tt
qirtfl{ttl{Iit ileTqr;It nrffaa\ r
ilqqt 'fe{ilmflil 

3Eil(iqi q iln *lqtl
atlena slefirtl=q {qfu*E e*eeq}: r
Tsrcri rQwruri q rgtenfcnrH(t ill\etl
Faneau{lcurt qTqr{til q q}c{r r
qerrf ,iqrq' ir fqnqt EIit{rIEEtnr:R ctl
YIqt qKEflr;ri iT, g{Sarii (Fn6efi,g I
qEqErilosqTqi q ,Rt{: gretete(ITti:l RQ.tl

24.29. FULL LIF| SPAN OF YARTOUS LIYING
BEINGS.. I now tell you the full life spanf iguresf or various
living beings. Gods and sagesc njoy encttessli fe rp"o 
astron-omicapl oportions Ci...ir  .

as against ordinary mortals). 
full life span The

o f eagres,o wrs, pirrots, crows and 
thousandy ears. snakesis  one

Falcon,_.nook"y,b ear,a nd frog_tne 
oflife iurfi;;

in these casesi s 300 years. Drrnoo,, lifisp-a n i" 
150y cars l;il;

w hile it is 120 yearsf or human beings. :Z y"o.. io,



Chapter 43 429
'24 

horses2, 5 years for donkeysa nd camels, yearsf or oxenand
buffaloes, 20 years for peacocks,1 6 yearsf or goatsa nd rams.
14 yearsf or swans,1 2 years for cuckoo, dog and dove, 8 years
for hense tc, and 7 yearsf or birds etc.-these are fujl life spans
for variousl iving beings

qtmg{r t'lqii feeryfrqq.gq!  r
ilg fr=a t,il rr€rfqfa + nq{rrrfqq utoii
filirrit qqltfr crr{Edwfrr'ffq\ |
<el frel1*i rrQI' ir;i *sfltr{i ilenultu

30-31. CHOICE OF LONGEVITY .' I have narrated
3 differentmethodso f longevity. Listen to me about the choice
amongt he threes ystems. Accordingt o the ascendantt,h e Sun
or the Moon being stronger than the other two, Amsayu'
Pindayuo r Nisargayu be respectivelyc hosen.

Tf,frTTA EdaTnqqqTq; ndtfrdrr I
rqrqi fagieriwud id Gqlnq !  r r lRrr

32. DOUBTFUL CASES .' If 2 amongt he ascendanttsh e
Suna nd the Moon gaine qualstrength,t hen longevityb e worked
out as per both systemsa nd the averageo f both( final) be consi-
dered. If all the 3 are equallystrong,t he averageo f the 3 be
considered.

'Notes:  In slokas30 and 3l above,w e are askedt o select
one amongt he 3 systemsv, iz Pindayu, Naisargayua nd Amsatu
accordirg to the Sun, the Moon and ascendanbt eingt he
strongest. If two among the threeh ave equalS hadbalat,hen
the averageo f the respectivesy stemsw ill bet he fina1l ongevity.
If the three are of equal strength,t he averageo f three systemsb e
takent o be actual life durationo f the native.

Take for examplew heret he Sun and the Moon are equally
strongand assumeth at Pindayuin dicatesa  life spanof 52.5y ears
while Nisargayu gives 40.7 years. The average of theset wo,
i.e. 46.35y earsw ill be the actuall ongevity.

Similarlya ssumethat the luminariesa nd the ascendanat re
equally strong, and contribute 62.9y ears Pindayu,2 5.5 years



430 Brihat ParasaraH ora Sastra

Nisargayua nd 12.8y carso f Amsayu.T he averageo f theset hree,
i,e. 33.73y earsw ill be the actuall ongevityo f the native.

qqTsa{€fq,qqafqry T ii Gqsaq ! r
,*fiqlqt{rsglqrl$qi q+fo{i ariq q ulltl
crr-dnfqqqrql qeflq: m'tfaaq r
rirTEi]lr drget{Tr$qqi }rr*rd fqfHa ulytl
f6dtd rt?{q?EI$EeT}rif  avil Gq}nq t r

Ed"td qRfwai{ ulrtl
q{<r{r't Rqal af K ilEr {lrigil€il\ '
qs: frqisq<] a?e *tiwgwurfi fE utqu
gs,qqi feais;aqdl ilitt rTdIIgqEa{ |
El qr a;e fcqal fqs ! qaqfl{€rqr& q uleu .
qnmqisqt aFe El qI fiqqqa"t ail t
ailil$'Trr il{rseqrqiqid flaq}f,qt  rrlerr
qlqeiq qlqnqi fsa q( qrEl*?ra E t
dqaqfriq€ Rrnql<tfqrTGurlier:t l
q.i ?il €cat qFn [rQr' q+girRRI l

6rq) $f{q tneqwtftq fq?iw eriei gi: llYol l
33-40. OTIIER CLUES TO LONGEVITY : O excellent

of the Brahmins,I  give you detailsof other methodsin the
mattero f longevitya s under : This is basedo n the positionso f
the ascendantI ord, 8th lord, Saturn,t he Moon, natal ascen{ant
and Hora ascendant( Hora Lagna). Thesesix are groupedi nto
threeg roupst hus : the lords of the ascendanta nd of the 8th
on the one hand, Saturnand the Moon on the other hand,a nd
tbe natala scendaota nd Hora ascendanot n yet the other hand,
Out of a group,i f the two are in movable sign/signslo ng life is
denoted. One in fixed sign and the other in a dual signw ill
also bestowl ong life. One in movable aign and the other in
fixed sign will give medium life. If both are in dual signt hen
againm ediuml ife will be obtained. Short life is denotedi f one
is in a movables ignas the other is in a commons ign,o r if both
are in fixed signs. The type of life denoted by three or two



Clnpter 43 431
groups be only consideredl.f  thc threegroupsd enoted ifferenl
scales,t hen the one indicated 

'and by the pair of natala scendant
Hora ascendan,bt e only considered. In case of thrce

differenti ndications if the Moon ls in the ascendanot r the Zth,
tben the one indicated by Saturn-Moonpair will only come to
pass.

Notes:  Three groups are considcredh eref or this system
of longevityc alculations. Following are the thrceg roups, each
€roup consistingtwo of the six.

Ist group-natal ascendantl ord and 8rh lord from the
ascendant.

2nd group-Saturn and the Moon.
' 3rd group-natal ascendanta nd Hora Langa. (For Hora

I:gna, seep . 63).
Thus two planets in one group, two planetsi n another

group and two ascendantsi u yet another group are selected.
Now their positions will denote the basic longevity. Note the
position of eacho f the constituenti n eachg roup thus :

l. Long life: If both the constituentsa re in movables igns
(jointly or separately),l ong life will comet o pass. Onc in fixed
sign and another in a dual sign will also gives amescaleo f
longevity.

2. Medium life : One in movable sign and anotherf ixed
signwill givem ediuml ife. Both in dua! signswill alsogive same
effects.

3. Short life : One in movable signand anotheri n dual
sign will indicatc short.life. Both of them in fixed signsw ill
producea gainshort life.

Thus, all the six possible positionso f a pair are covered.
lVhich group is to be consideredf or arriving at life spana nd
in wbat circumstancebse  understoodt hus.

4. Out of the three groups, the scaleof span( viz. Iong,
medium and short) indicated by two or threeb e considered.
Suppose two groups indicate medium life while another
sbort life, then take mediums panas.theb asico ne. Alternatively
if three indicate identical scales,i  e. Iong, short or medium,
cclnsidetrh at as the case may be. It is also possibleth at one
group denoteslo ng life, another medium life and yet another
short life. In that casefollow point 5 given belbw.



432 Brihut Parasorq Hora Sastra

5. If 3 groups denote variable spans,t he group of natal
ascendanat nd Hora ascendanwt ill havc a say on the indication.
Whatever this pair denoteswill be the basics pani n caseof
threed ifferent indications.

6. Rule 5 hasa lsoan exceptiont,h us. That is, in the case
of three differenti ndications( i.e. onc long life, anothermedium
fife and yet anothers hort life), seet he positiono f the Moon in
the natal horoscope. lf she is in the ascendanot r in the 7th,
then the indication given by the pair of Hora-nataal scendants
be ignored and the indication of Saturn-Moon be alone
considered. lf the Moon is neither in the ascendannto r in the
7th, then follow the indicationo f }Iora-natal ascendantass  given
in rule 2 above.

{td *qntoi?i irqq;Rtqrii{'rr: I
*qatr q€qm ql't*n qwi66l: uYt tl
qoi qlqe}t{ qlcagcqrr{rrlr Tr[ilr: l
aqfi .qlratmedifMiuqfqei: uYRrl
srdn qlqrlonsrErtffisefi(il: r
qlrraAa qe.tT{rEfrri*a ir Gn6uqn:vltl
q{ al{eme\ (lTr6tlq} (€rr€F: I
q! sr Ef,fkilrtrq: F6EqT4:s {srertdu vvrl

4l-44. FURTHER CLARIFICATIONS.' If long life is
denotedb y all the said three groups, the span is 120y ears,i f
by  twogroups i t i s  108 yearsa nd i f  on lybyonegroup i t i sg6
years.I f mediuml ife is arriveda t.by threeg roups,i t is 80 years,
by 2 groups7 2 years and by one group 64 years. If short life
is denotedb y the saidt hreeg roupsi t is only 32 years,i f by two
groups 36 yearsa nd by one group 40 years. Thesea re rectified
as under.

Notes : Again, the sagef ixest he guantum of yearsf or long,
short,and mediuml ife spanst,hus.

Long life : by 1 pairs-120 years(harmonic reduction of
12 years)

2 pairs-I80 years
I pair -96 years



Chapter 43 433

Medium life : by 3 pairs-80 years( harmonic reductiono f
8 years)

2 pairs-72 years
I pair -64 years

Short life : by 3 pairs-32 years( progressivei ncreaeeo f
4 years)

2 pairs-36 years
I pair -40 years

The indicationh ast o be selecteda s per rules4  to 6 givcn
in the notesf or slokas3 3-40.

We will now work out the basiccontribution of longcvity
for the same example as given for Pindayu calculations' The
chart may be understood from Pindayu example, while Hora
Lagna is Taurus 20' 32' 12".

The first group-ascendant lord is in a movablesign and
the 8th lord is also in a movablei ign. Hencc long life.

The second group-Saturn and the Moon are respectively
in dual sign and movable sign. Hence short life.

The third group-Hora Lagna and the qatal ascendan&t rc
both in fixed signs. Again short life.

Two groupsi ndicateshort life. Hencewe are left with no
dilemmab ut to select he indicationsg iven-by thc twogroups,
i.e. short life. Two pairsindicate 'hence 

short life, 36 years will
be the basicl ongevity.

This basicl ongevity will have to be rectiGedf urther as per
the instructionsg iveni n the following verses.

$fi ffiqfEi qri trfa{ttgwa: r
*rrmr<t,daindttRtrirqqt til llY{ll
.tT6elim(g qqrFrqfqlsEirrFd{d1qlt: t
qEsqqtfafqtfd nrilrq: reqe nlq ttvqtt

45-46.R ECTIFICATIONS .' If the contributor ig in thc
beginningo f a sign, his donation will be full and it will bc nil
if he is at the end. For intermediaryp lacements,r ule of thrco
process will apply. Add the longitudes of the contributors
(devoid of signs) and the sum so arrived at be divided by thc
number of contributors. The latestp roduct be multiplicd by thc



434 Brilnl Parasara Hora Sas.lra

number of basic yearsa nd dividedb y 30'. This will yield the
net longevity.

Notes:  If the contributori s in the zero-degreoef  the sign,
his sbarew ill be full and if he is at the end, it will be zero' In
between, his contribution is Proportionately known' The
longitudeso fthe contributors, accordingt o being2 or 4 or 6 as
the case may be shoutd be added togethcr, devoido f signs'
The resultani product be dividedb y 2 or 4 or 6 dependingo n
the contributors. This figure sbould be multiplied by basic
yearsa nd divided by 30 which will be net spano f life. Basic
y-beeairnsgw  ill also depend on whethero ne, two or threes pansa re

considered. Whcn we are consideling short life by 3
pairs,s uchf igurew ill be 96 (i.e. 32x  3) or when mediuml ife by
) p*rs are 6eing consideredi t will be 144,( i'e' 72x2) and so
on and ro forth.

Intheexamplehoroscope,wehaveshort l i fecontr ibuted
by 2 pairs and hince basic years for the.time being bc taken as

li <i.i.36 plus 36). The contributors are Moon' Saturn'M ars

*O lttt"u.y. Their longitudesd evoid-  of signsa dded denote

.ii; ig;26". rnit is to 6e divided by 4, as there are 4 contri-

b u t o r s . T h u s w e g e t | x s g , S T , , . T h i s i s t o b e m u l t i p l i e t l b y
iili"ti. i."*l oo? dividedb v 30' Th'en et longevitivq  this
procesi s 3 1.18Y ears'

Though Pindayua ppliest o the saidh oroscopew'e  have

simptitat<eit he sami asa n examp.lien regardt o thea pplication
of thec urrents ystem'

drr[at {rql swrr6tds?i1fat=ai t
r €eiqg.i al il qmrrlet*fefiu Ysu

47. SPECIAL RULE FOR SATURN Should Saturn
"

bc a contributor,t he classo f longevityd eclines .S omea dvocate,
contrarily, an increaseo f classi n this context' If Saturni s in

own signo r in exaltation,c hangein  classw ill not occur' Even
if he ii aspected by or conjunct only a malefic, no change



Ckapter 43 435

srlqcilqf qt* gll{rexiftnt r
rfqesr{q} fqs t raqqfq: q-dmilt tyqtl

48. SPECIAL RULE FOR JUPITER.' If Juplter is In
the ascendant or in the 7th house, and be aspccted by or
conjunct only benefrcst,h c classo f longevity will increase.

qil{{ri1 qtqFqrrFw{sti sqTqi r
rTrqflaqrqi {t{ dtalgffit&t1 nYerl
qlqtit Ta*t 6aiqqd{q ctHqq I
gr({rq iqtteiq $q4r6rq: n<l taq lllotl

49-50. INCREASE AND FALL IN CLASS OF
LONGEVITY : From very short life to short life, from short
life to medium life, from medium life to long life and from long
life to extremely long life are the increasesin  the clascificstion

i of longevity when Jupiter warrantsa n inorease. Thc reverse is
i true if Saturn warrantsa  fall in the span of life.

qqql cEqI farr s'fqrdr qqilsq|il |
rfaur il.fi{Is{r{dirdq: lniil rlq trtltt

51. (Maitreya says):  You have narrated variousk inda of
longevlty computations. Please favour mc by denotinge ubtlc
classesth ere ofand poor and long life spans.

srqrRsd qlqtf(caqe{ qgqsqrihinl t
f€Ed qqrsfqii *{ (qqlq: sritftRrqn tRrl

52. (Parasara replies) : These ate seven-fold, viz.
Balarishta,y ogarishta,s hort, medium, long, super-natura(l Divya)
and illimitable.

lrf,rre qqr.rGEql lflRce q fq{rft: t
6rtTq qir<t sfet qgeqfigta qgql ntltl
Fvnfqslrd Ai ffi- I
r6a{rfnd gorirfwttrrn"{ffiqarqqi : tttvtr

53-54.T he tife spani n Balarishtais  8 yearsi,n  Yogarishta
20 yearsi;n  short, medium and long lives3 2,6 4a nd 120y carr



436 Brihat Parasura Hora Sastra

in order are the spans. Supern atural life spani s for 1000y ears.
Abovet bis supernaturalli fe spano f 1000y earsi t is Amitayu or
illimitablel ongevitywhich can be acquiredo nly by Merits.

rdad q-Ecftdn ilfirdf *tsifTqnt t
qrt ,{qrRrfr: €Er afraqraar qiq n{{rl

55. LIMITLESS LONGEYIT'Y : Should Cancerascend
with Jupitera nd the Moon there in while Venus,andM crcury
are in anglesa nd others are in 3rd, 6th and llth, thc nativew ill
obtainl imitlessl ongevity.

dlqr: ffirrn}qsfi: qgreqrqrRrnilqT I
{trilil fut rrd feaangrrcTq \ rrtqrr

56.,SUPERN- ATa RAL LONGE VI TI.' Oneh avingbenefics
in angles/trinesa s maleficsare in 3rd, 6thand llth wilt obtain
Bup€r-naturall ife span (one thousand years). The 8th housc
in this cases hould be onc of benefic-owneds igns.

.qrn $r H q* qnndrrf r
fHa trdt qA grrFirqtail Gq t ttt\err

57. LII/ING TILL THE END OF YUGA.' One born in
Cancera scendantw ill live till the end of the yugai f Jupitcr is
io au angle and be in Gopuramsa while Venusi s in a trine and
be in Paaravatamsa.

ffirffi' se gi qrrrrcint r
Tfr Feqrtatrilrgq.t efrn ftml n?qrtteu

58. LIVING THE LIFE SPAN OF A SAGE.' Jupiter in
Simhasanamsbae ing in the ascendant,S aturn in Devalokansa
and Mars in Paaravata,nsa-if these are Eo,o ne will enjoy thc
life s;an as due to a sage.

gd+{rit grt: gdnfet ilqr I
qr) qlrnQ qat {tqurtwrT(fir1 utqtl

59. Good yogas increasethe life span and bad yogas
dccreasethe same( as arrived by mathematical means). Hence



Chapter43 437
I tell you such yogasa c to know of full, medium and short span
combinations.

ki qqQ{{il fffi q rrrf;qt r
€qd gaorTq Ts&g otnrgeaaqrt E ttq,ott

' 60. Ifan apglec ontainsa  beneficwhile tbe ascendanlto rd
is conjuncto r in.aspecto a benefico r Jupiter in particular,t he
nativewill live_af ull spano f life,

*rrfi{A fqq,i{i lF{rsct-qt I
irnqt f{Afun qrsfq$ iqrgfqf{fErfun qttl

61. Should the ascendantl ord be in an angle in con-
junction with or in aspoot o Jupiter and Venus,f ull life span
will result.

' sEqRr*Rqfr{: ditirardniqii: r
3{Gel qttTdH q gdrrgfcfaffiqr rqlrr

62. lf at birth 3 planetsa re exalted,out of which the lords
ofascendantand8 thare inclusive,as the 8th is devoidofa
malefici n it, full life spanw ill result.

ueaqrtP"f,{ di: FEh"fq?rqqfi: r
qfii aaig* *{erXrmr €q trqln

63. Long life is denoted if 3 planetsa re in the 8th, in
exaltation, own/friendly divisions while the ascendanlto rd is
stroDg.

rafrq(i{ Wc a*rir (qf:m: I
eirfr{; {rffifq {l{qqFfirftilE ttqvtl

64. IfSaturn or the ascendant lord is conjunct with any
exaltedp lanet, long lifc will result.

feqElqqi: qtt: {*r *irfrduri: r
arifr aadglt Adffgftftf{riE nq{rr

65. Long life will be enjoyedi f maleficsa re in 3rd, 6th
and I lth while beneficsa re in angles.



$8 Brlhat.P arasaraH oro Sor,rra

. lE.RK?Iil{'Tg lqdEEilq q I
ffig rr qm{ RoiqqfqfrfqriEn' i,qu

66. If the 6th, 7th and Eth are occupiedb y beneficswhile
maleffo arc in 3rd and llth, full life spanw ill follow the birth.

rllrFFtct: rr|qr q|tlt} qR *;rT: t
<fifq* rr ain: $fqrgwqrfr Q trqstt

67, If the 8th lord is friendlyt o the Sunwhile maleficsa re
in the 6th and l2th as the ascendantl ord is in an angle, the
nativewill live the full spono f life.

mT: tqtqfiqlr: rmn: tfR: eqltqql qfl t
nnfq {tfflX tlr{ fqid tsqrlaq I ttqctt

68. O excellento f thc Brahmins,i f a malefic is in the 8th
while the l0lord is eralted,o ne will be long-lived.

'wf 
ftT{qrlr1t qfii *arifeqil r
dtrflftfr{nQ et {ftffiifaffiq tlqcll

69. Long life will follow if a dual eign ascenda t birth while
its lord is in an angteo c in exaltationo r in a trine.

Etcvrmt ttfi qfirtir rdqgaK I
il qrql qfE t?rrdl {ftingemr qii ttuon

70. Should a common slgn ascendw hile two maleficsa re
in en angle with refercncet g strong ascendanlto rd, long life is
indicated.

wnqfuftiun rr: d* s{q} wiq r
ffir1 t-.zqt fl{ qcd qorqcfiqtl tettl
€nQfitql ffi Tftqqq{qfr ftfiqat r
erii q rifqi fftirrgr €i rTq{nettl
r* se{ qiftqqGat{rnfr qilt I
fqrqifisfffiq3i rfHd sd a\ trslrr

7l-73. The stronger among the ascendantl ord and the
8th lord if in an angle will coofer long life and if in Panaphara



Chapter43 439

(2nd, sth, 8th or llth) mediuml ife. If thes aidp tanetbein 
Apoklima( 3rd, 6th, 9th or l2th) short life will comel o pass.
Accordingt o the ascendanlto rd being friendly,n eutral or
inimicatl o the Sun,l ong,m ediumo r shortl ife will result.

({qTftvr{g"l fr <;frffiriqqrl 1
sretil? Ttq u{{$il €cqqtg: sqiqa: lleYll

?4. Should Mars and the 3rd lord, or the 8th lord and
Saturnb e combust or (two of either pair) be conjunctmalefrcs
or aspectedb y maleficst,h ere will be short life.

qststrt aqi qrsft qlfti qtqigt I
Grq qrirqirft qr {Trt{s,r{rq,i llsul

?5. If the ascendanlto rd is in the 6th, 8th or l2th in the
companyo f malefics and be devoido f conjunction/aspecotf  a
benefic,s hort life will comet o pass.

qgGaqqt qrt nvqfcafffiri r
s q

{q0+ fflq+til rEarrrgtifrtffiE Irsq ,tl
76. lf malefics are in angles devoid of conjunctiono r

aspecto f bencficsw hile the ascendantl ord is not strong,o nly
short life will result.

aqqlqJ" qTqdgqfrl nmqfr|t{ftrf,l t
TqilntqtaEr :i'ti fatqd{i Eq}ilq I tt\estt

77. O excellent of Brahmins, if the l2th and 2nd are
occupied by malefics and be devoid of benefic aspect or
company,t he native will be short-lived.

mr<iinqlid g:?qqlicql-{fr:I 
€|rdtrqqt{ilq tqarfrqrtq qeqqq neqtl

?8. If the lords of the ascendanta nd the 8th are bereftof
dignities and strength, short life will comet o pass If they
are helped by others while being so, medium life will come
to pass.



ststr ilwiErgfirl: I tvvtl
Ctrpter 44

Maraka (Killer| Planets
rgmsqi'n qlqr: rferdr qailinsqil |
1rt qnrrirr{q wwai sqqr gtl rrlrr

t. O sage,y ou havementioneda  lot about longevity. Be
kind enought o throw light on Marakaso r killers.

$itqqcEqcqraqrq:rst{ Eti frq t r
,mri rqqqqrqrf fildtd sqd aqr rrQrr

2-5. O Brahmin,t he 3rd and 8th are the two houseso f
longevity. The houscs related to death are the l2th from each
of these,i .e. the 2nd and'7th are Maraka houscs.

Notes : The 3rd housei s alsoa houseo f longevitya s it is
thc 8th from the 8th. The 2nd house-l2rh from the 3rd-and
thc 7th house-l2th from the 8th-are two principle Maraka
houses. Thc lordq of these housesw ill also acquire such
qualitieogiving life or taking away life.

fifq sttq?ttar{ fadld qmrtr(t I
ildftit t? rdl: qrfqiRiq e'gn: ttlt
i igr: qrrqirti q qq w$F(ilr6l: r
ilqt ?rlrflrrrtg srqi frui 1urq rrvn

'feuKr{q-r amquqfg: r$Tlqfqt dqq t
rq{ t€i rRri tRlwatq rrrrr

3. Out of the two (i.e 2nd and 7th) the 2nd is a powerful
Maraka house( as againstt he 7th) The lords of the 2nd and the
7th, malefic'sin  tho 2nd ard the ?th and maleficsaceompanying
tbc 2nd and the 7th lords are all known as Marakas. The major
and sub periodso f thesep lanetsw ill bring deathon the native
depcndingo n whetherh e hasa  long life, mediuml ife or shortl ife.



Chapter 44 441

Notes : The 2nd an<l 7th are denoteda s Maraka houses.
but the 2nd is givena  more important placet o kill than the 7th
house. For the 2nd housea cquiresa n additional qualification of
beingi n the 7th from the 8th house.T hus, the 2nd is l2th from
the 3rd, and 7th from the 8th.

If therei q a malefici n the 2nd or in the 7th, he will be a
prime killer while a beneficwill not be so. The Dasa periods of
suchp lanetsw ill inflict death.

arilIi gatiut srffiin aaritng:r 
nfaw-rni a a{nrqcel{ttlfig quqrl
*sfir{i rr q|qrii amg frad q{fqq r
scq{fri qtii.ri qnt,mrqElti rrrgrr

6-7. The Dasa of a beneficp lanetr elatedt o the l2th lord
may also inflict death. End may descendo n the nativei n the 8th
lord's Dasa. The Dasao f a planetw hich is an exclusivem alclic
(i.e. first-ratemalefic)may alsocaused eath.

Notes:  The l2th houseis alsoa houseo f death,f or it is
the terminal house. Malefics related to 2nd, 3rd, Tth and 8rh
will caused eathw hile or not a beneficr elatedt o l2th will do so.
The Dasao f a malefic,w helhero r not he is a lord of oneof these
houses,w ill also prove harmful for spano f life. Ho\wever,f or
Saturn,a  dilferentapproachi s recommended.

The rules givena re just general and are hints to decide
deathg ivers. The life spans houldb eascertainedth rough other
Ayurdaya catculations, and the exact dasap eriodsb e dccided
only later on. Simply sayingt hat the 2nd lord's dasawill bring
in death and so on and so forth will be a misnomer. The sage
suggeststh at the occupantso f the 3rd,alsowi[ caused eath..T hus
thc 8th and the 3rd, though known as houseso f longevity,a re
gimultaneouslyc apableo f causingd eath. For the information
of the reader,t he Maraka planetsi n the ascendinga re : occu-
ponts ofor lords of l2th, 3rd, 8rh, ?th and 2nd. The lords/
gccupantso f 6th and llth are seco'ndg rade killers. The last
group consistso f occupants/lordosf  5th, 9th, l0th, 4th and Ist.
They are the least rnarakas. However, thesec an also become
Marakas dependingo n the cluesg iven in slokas l5-2t infra.



412 Brthd Parasara Hora Sastra

A difficult subjectl ike tongevityc annotb e fully explained
in a chapter like this. The readerm ay take basicg uidelines
from the presentw ork and other standardworks beforef orming
au opinion on longevitY.

qd{fq sia qrq-.ri t Qff, {qrlfrd{ |

ECfr €Frarqr.r'ei qtr$: qTqtf{ag llqu
8. The dasao f a male{icwillnotc aused eath in the Antar-

dasa( sub period) of a beneficp lanet, althought he former, is
related to the latter, but in the sub periodql a maleficp lanet
though not relatecl'

qI€q'((IEE?aTfi;tQFat rtiltui€qR: I
ql6qulare HEt{ qqirra t rinq: ttett

9. Shold Saturnb e ill-disposeda nd be relatedt o a maraka
plqnet,h e will be the lirst to kill in prelerenceto  other planets.

snrr$qqfrr qeqtfq faq t qr(mqHq{ |
fafrun-qrqql q),tt: raeng{uaa}flRl: | | | ol l
arhrnq gaietwgdwTqrgcltl: qr{ |
qgcq6eqTg:r €q( g ad) atdgaqaq llltll
iriTqrq: qral{e{ nliT€d GqcrHq!  t

?r rRrRtu tRrl
w-6lr-fa fm.qI Eqi ttrci i A rntq t

' fqwi fnqiiw *fa;rqu{qfq ttt llt
tFqE *arRcatrrmqf xfqil ileqliq{: I
irir: qT 1grTqlTirri{ Gqtrf,q ! ttqvtt

10-14.O  Brahmin, I tell you further about Marakas'
Narratede arliera re three kinds of life spans,v iz' short,m edium
and long. Short life is before 3l years, latero n upto 64 it is
med'urnlife aod from 64 to 100i t is long life. Beyond1 00 the
longevityi s called supreme. O excellenot f the Brahmins,i t is
impossibleto  decideu pon longevityt ill the nativei s 20 yearo ld'
Tii suchy ear the child should be protectedb y sacredr ecitations,
religious offerings( of gheeetc. to consecr&tedli re as prescribed



Chapter4 4 443

by Vedase tc.) and medicalt reatments,f or prematured eath may
discend on the child due to sins of father or mother or of its
own (in the previous birth).

B[qr$qEfq qstt|f,q Ttri qr(|6tteNr{ I
slfntfrrrilftFq fqq Ji ir tft,inq uttrt
qsqqqArceiri sflrfr ir $adaq r
{turQdrrwaeq qqt g 1feriiqn tqu
arfq{11ri{rq{,*q Wn iarfvtrfuq: t
Rqat<r-seritm €iriwtq g tltsll
w*ffil q fqiql T,a66ir,!ilq fac I r
qnrl qrqdal a} q* *slrrE"tq lnl lltcll
qearlqqqmqi q qqi fltrqwqq; 1

fa{nq nterl
qt<E6t qEq: deT qf{ *rtqqtkil: t
ffi{{rrfii fqr ' <}qmcafqisq:t rR"tl

. irqin t qffifds neel grcw16': l
ffiq${rg€rior $ .n qtaufariq ltRt ll

15-21. I furtber mention about the Maraka planets.
One born with short lifs combinations may face death in the
Dasad enotedb y Vipat star (3rd from birth star);o ne of medium
life may die in the dasadenotcdby Pratyak star (5th from birth

-sotnaer) . .In the dasa denotedb y Vadha star (7th from birth star),
with long life may obtain his end. The dasao f the lord of

22nd decanateo r the one of 23rd, 3rd, Sth or ?th asterismsm ay
also cause death. The lords of the 2nd and l2th counted from
the Moon signm ay bring death,t his is true whent he saidr uler
is a malefica nd if he be a benefict here will be (only) diseases
(but not death). Death may comet o passi n the dasao f the 6th
lord and in the sub periodso f 6th/8th/l2th lords. Should there
be many Marakas (endowedw ith the power of killing) and be
strong, therc will be diseases,m isbriese tc. in the respective
major and sub periods. Thus thesea re Marakas (as above)and
are primarily relatedt o descendd eathu pon the native. Accor'
ding to thcir dispositioust here may be dcath or difficulties.



441 .. Brlhat Parasara Hora Sastra

Notes : The Maraka power of a planet may be correlated
to the spanof life arrived by other calculations. If both
coincide therewill be death. If therei s a variation, therc will
not be deathb ut difficultiese qualt o deathl ike miseries,d iseases,
poverty etc.

rrg{iazril *gFir+ sllsaai .qt r
qR*m;qe ilsR qtq*tq dga: rr11rr
qRiil: Q €t fq*q: g{E{|r;iltnRqf'qI  
qdi {va* ar;rr lrdRr€r 1farc: illltl
q66lsqR6sril {Tgrnflt firrE} q\ r
{qr({it} {ce} ,il ir{r $'cEQfq6;i llYtl

22-24.R AHU AND 'KETU AS MARAKAS : If Rahu or
Ketu be in tho ascendanTt,l h,8th or l2th lhercotlo r be in the
7th from a Malaka lord or be with sucha  planet,t hey acquire
pbwefso f kill ing in thcir majoror sub pcriods. For oncb orn
in Capricorno r in Scorpio, Rahuw ilt bc a Maraka, Should
Rahu be in the 6th, 8rh or t2th, hc will giveclil l lcultiesin  his
dasa periods. He will not, howevcr,d o so if aspectedb y or
conjuncta bene{ic.

Notes:  Importantp laccsfo r Rahu/Ketut o acquirep ower
of kill ing aret he ascendanTt,r h. Sthor l2th. The 2nd houseis 
naturally addeda s another nodew ill be in the 2nd wlrcno ne is
in the speclfied8 th house. They will not be Marakas if they
are in the 3rd, 9th, 5th and llth houses.lf  a nodej oins a Maraka
planet 1or is in the houseo f a Marakap lanet)i t will actas.a
Maraka. Rahu is termeda s a primary maraka for Capricorn
and Scorpio ascendants. lf he is in one of the adverseh ouses
for these ascendantsh is dasa wiil briog death or intolerable
difficulties.

iTnrr( gitawi g qfqqr rfecr gfr r
rr{a}ra q{oi nrxr iiri Bq}rq I nR{tl
giln igil g{i Esi qr qsqqT1 fa: r
gfra quunarFq-Erqrii{toir riq rrlqrr



Chapter 44 45

qa"ti nfa-(6$tri qqil Eaisfqq r faq ! |
fqqfilal lfaatar vFTIE€I rft$tsilt ttRell
nalgtrrq cqirfl< .Ftmir qr lft{\ l
Eflt aeref-{$qi tlt qI dlfai faq ttlctt
fft3oaftar il(q qwi qqtd %qq I
Eiftt qai1lil dtfat qrfq eq ir nRQ.tl
cqtrr rrtui awr fqiid Bqsaq ! t
Edri gaqr t* t"i qilsTffit qfr: ttlotl
rdia rg{T{c} *6t'lnu a;1fa:t 
qgdagil aftn1 q6tTrqil cff,: ttl ttt

21-31. THIRD HOUSE AND DEATH .' O excellento f
Brahmins,i f the Sun, being with strength,is  in the 3rd house
from the ascendant, one will obtain his death due to a king (or
tegalp unishments). The Moon in the 3rd will caused eathd ue
to tuberculosiswhile wounds, weapons,f ire and thirst will cause
dcath through Mars in the 3rd. If the 3rd be aspectedor
occupiedby Saturn and Rahu, death will be through poison,
water or fire, or fall from heights or confinement. Death will
surely comet o descendt hrough insectso r leprosyi f the Moon
and Gulika occupy or aspectt he 3rd house. Mercury aspecting
or occupyingt he 3rd will bring death followed by fever. Jupiter
in the 3rd or aspectingt he 3rd wiil caused eath by swelling or
tumourc. Urinary diseasews ill caused eathi f Venusi s in the 3rd
or aspectst he 3rd. Many planets aspectingo r occupying will
bring deatht hrough manydiseases.

Notes : The sageb ringsi n the 3rd housei n the contexto f
death.A ccordingt o the planetsr elatedt o 3rd houseby conjunc-
tion or aspect, death will descend on the native through the
following causes.
The Sun lEgalp unisbments,d eath'awardse tc' '(also

cardiacp roblem)
The Moon - tuberculosis(l ung disorderse tc.)
Mars - Wounds (accidentse tc.), weapons( eecoun-

ter), fire (alsoe lectricity)a nd thiist.
Saturn/Rahu - poison, water, fire, confinement,f alls eto.



446 Brihat Parasaral lorq Sastra

Moon and Gulika * insects (scorpion, bees, snakese tc.) or
lcprosy.

Morcury severefe ver (typ'hoide tc.)
Jupiter swelling, tumour, etc. (also jaundicd,

dropsye tc.)
Vcnus urinaryd isorders(k idney troubies,v enereal

discasees tc.) (for femalesl eucorrhea).
Mixed planets variousr easons

Eiiln q {*{€ {qli fa{\ t
qrtqq dl6l ilt fqaifqbrw* tfa: tt11tt

32, If the 3rd housei s occupiedb y a benefic,d ealhw ill
be in an auspiciousp lace (like a shrine) and if by a malefici n
sinful places. Mixed occupationw ill yield mixed resultsi n this
regard.

Eilt g!-qltrrqt $* aria i 1fa: r
3ffiIiqrsrqdelq tffiqr faq'fnq ! tt11tt

33. Consciousnesws ill prevaila ( the time of death if
Jripiter or Venusb e in the 3rd. With otherst herein,t herew ill
be unconsciousncsbse foredeath.

wrwit Eilq?A qrei qk{et r
fimavit eqtt q lrrmA qfq feqi  ulYrl

34. Accordingt o the 3rd housebeinga movable,f ixed or
dual sign,d eath will be in a foreign place (other than native
place),i n one'so wn houseor on the way.

qrar{deqrlTil€q fifirii fr,frlii Tti: t
gi$dsfiial qi$q?i Stuiti q ui{tl

' {Tc"r{ qlt cq<rEi  q gn <}.q {En Tr? |
fqqrrqr vrq} ggfai* 'frsnrqq l'ttlqtt

35-36 : OCCUPANTSO F THE 8TH HOUSE .' Note the
occupanto f the 8th housef rom. the ascendant. If it is the Sun,
deathw ill be through fire, the Moon water, Mars weapons,
Mercury fever, Jupiter diseasesV, enush unger and Saturn thirst.



Chapter 44 447

s{6el {r1r1tq* sft cT q*{i r
dl{ lfaraei iiqr q1qrcq1?qetfirlr  rti'erl

37. Shou d tbe-8th houseb e occupiedo r aspectedb y a
benefic while the 9th lord is conjuncta  benefict he nativewill
die in a shrine. If maleficst ake the role of beneficsa s above,
deathw ill be in a placeo ther than a shrine.

qr;qqfeuq?dqitql $$1$ft{*: I
qf{q[F: qltrrlns? qrqdqils{Jq*: l l Q el l
Eqrqq{Ttroteg fqsrs} qqlil s{q{ |
{Ff(tt €E{rf,rBirl irsTfirfEcfHfr:r r 1 e rr

38-39.F ATE OF THE CORPSE; Should there be a
benefic'sd ecanatein  the 8th'(i.e. the 22nd decanateb eingso),
the corpse will be burnt in fire (as prescribedin  Sastras)i;f  a
malefict decanateb e there, the body will be thrown away in
,water. If the decanatein {uestion is ownedb y a mixed planet
the deadbody will only dry up. If it be a serpentd ecanatet,he
body will be eatenaway by animali, crowse tc.

sqit qsqqlsftq{q lftarruftatqn} r
dtisfieqR?qrrqq zfiaqqt: qft1ftrdrn: yoll

' 40. ,SERPENT DECANATES .'The 2nd and 3rd *ieca-
natesi n Cancer, the initial one in Scorpioa nd the last one in
Piscesa re designateda s serpendt ecanates.

qfqwrilnn'rFanirqTE {{'t aFT:I 
?qa)6rqH qlqra] fqiiql Gqeirq!  rrvlrr
q*a'f: Fquilrq aui=q rfqqJqq} t
lsrs{fii(fl*i EFqErTaaq? q gdt: rtyRrl

4l-42. PRE-NATAL ABODE.' O excellentof Brahmins
the strongero f the luminaries occupyinga  decanateo f Jupiter
denotesd escenftr om the world of gods. If the saiddecanateb e
of Venuso r the Moon the descenits from the world of the
Manes,i f be of the Sun or Mars it is from the world of the dead
(of Yama) and if be of Mercury or Saturn it is from the hell.



448 Brihat PurasaraHora Sastra

ga{qrcffiill q{drl ilqit qsrrq{ |
tirggaalql6q il?i€rfiTR(;Etql: ilYltl
stctt t? rgm+ {;atR:rirra1qql: t
d edt q fqd e}d qqix?t Gilnq t rrvvrr
ileq g'lEilfq-iftqiql r(wzilsurlT:w r( |

. trtriql+sfq rlrqrei fqiifl Gqqaq ! rrvtrr
43-45.A SCENT AFTER DEATH.' According to the

following planetsi n the l2th, 7th, 6th or the 8th, the nativewill
Ittain such worlds after death: Juriter-heaven, the Mooo or

'Venus-the 
world of Manes, Mars/Sun-earth (i.e. rebirth),

Mercury/Saturn-hell. Shouldt he said housesb enot occupied,
the native will go to the world as indicatedb y strongero f the
decanatelo rds relatedt o the 6th and the 8th. The relative
planet's exaltatione tc. will denote the high, mediuma nd low
rtatus the native will obtain in the said world.

ffqq qRriqi{q ufnqgaq Eq t r
{msqTqsdilq nqfqrqtfq g{f, t uvqtl

46. Other planetsa nd Rasisb ecomingMarakasa re being
discussedin the cbapter relsted to Dasas.

srsT €rEwttsrtTlqtv: {t I
' 

Cbap?{rs 

AvasthasO f Planets
ctr€qFntt: shd qUuri qq qtf gi t r
irr (rsqrqrg ftioat nfnfi ift ruqar{t rr1 rr

1. O sage,y ou haveearliers tatedt bat the Avasthas( states)
of planetsb e consideredi n the context of planetary efrects. Bc
kind to tell me about the same,



Chapter 45 449
qErF{nfq f{iil efia r6roii eewenw t r
il{qifHrT 4r€ilrg ilFfr€rRirr zRrraiqq1 ,,,,

2. O excellent of Brahmins, variousk inds of planetary
Avasthash aveb eene xpounded.O ut of these, I telt you th;
sumrnaryo f infant and other states( in the first instance).

srrT( ETF[:S qrtlsq lril laG]qlr t!il: I
" sstiwl <ier q* iiql f<wiarqr rlrr

3. INFANT STATE ETC : Infant,y outhful,a dolescenot,l d
and deadare the stateso f planetsp lacedi n the ascendingo rdcr
at the rate of six degreesi n odd signs. This arrangementi s
reversein  the caseo f evens igns.

Notes : These5  Avasthas are known as Baatadi Avasthas.
For odd signs,t he placemenct oncernedw iil denotet he Avastha
as under :

. Infant state( Baalavastha) - 0 to.6o
- Youthful state( Kumaravastha) _ 6 to 12"

Adolescenst tate( yuvavastlra) -12 to lg"
Advanceds tate (Vridhdhavastha_) lg to 24.
In exrremis( Mritavastha) _24 to 30o

The above order is to be reversedf or placementi n an even
sign.

qi{ qnfTrd ilt, saTd a gnn* r
$a goFf f t'ri TA fuflirE 1* a vq rrvrr

4. RESULTS .. One fourth, half, full, negligiblea nd nit
are the gradeso f resultsd ue to a planet in infant, youthful,
adolescento, ld and deads tates.

€miq*: qqg€<$rql: u1n{tad: r
qm?eqcigsciqr@n E&rTqr rrlitq66|r: ilttl

5. AWAKENING, DREAMING AND SLEEPING
srATES.' If a planeti s in its own signo r in exaltatioai t is said
to be in a state of awakening (or alertness). In the sign of a
friend or of a neutral it is in dreaming state while in eiemy's
sign or in debjlitationi t is in a stateo f sleeping.



450 Brihat ParasaraH ora Sastra

qrqi q qti g!fl ?q"i qcqsi{ aqt t
ggt?fr g"qd qtq fTfl'ri Bqffiq! ttqtt

. lt. Accordingt o a planet beingi n Awakening,D reaming.
or Sleepings tates, the results due to it will be full, medium
or nil.

dl.t: €rr[: qgfec'n r* ala]sqg :ftre:t 
frtq{q qq: nlsfteqqrqt ?tqatsrtl: llull-

7. OTHER KINDS OF STATES. ' Thcre are nine kinds
of other states,v iz. Deepta,S wasthaP, ramudita,S anta,D eena,
Vikala, Khala. and KoPa.

sq'lFqrq:Qqr}{ tq: tld €T{itsFqfqei r
gft* fqri mftt: qqt {ta stqil ttctt
mi ?:fqc: clsil fq6'q: qrqriXa:t 
ci: dA fq: sldt rwedila: ttett
lt1{rl wqtri q: di q{qrfiil tiq t
mt* aw qFR{ sqgq' faq}frq I ttlotl

8-10. If a planet is in its exaltations ign, it is in Deepta-
vastha,i n own sign Swastha,i n thick friend's sign Pramudita,
in friendly sign Santa,i n neutral'ss ign Deena,i n the company
of a malefic'V ikata, in an enemy's sign Khala, and in being
cclipsedb y the Sun-Kopa. Depending on sucha stateof tlie
planet, ttre house occupied by it will obtain corresponding
cfiecr.

trftqil qfireq*q qfuaqfeawql I
gfea: qftfrrdvqq q$rrfl: ga'tfilil: ll I t ll

,n[atwarcm:: €n rrg*gXalsr<tt 
<f<e;agtr$d nfiq* qE oa* rr11tt
gg+srflt-A ilsfq fkdqisR uitgt: t
qfqa: qlstq qfd frfqYid Gq'lrq ! tttltt
1q.r$ {qgrn} Rgqae} q*sft t
{fua: g g.fqa'q: {rfigq* .rql acn lllYll



Chapter 45 451

qecrn] &qil: tie, nlqr qrsqRlfFil' I
{qqEr ?Tq TqFflq fue: € vEr€a:i lt{rr
faarr{t fqaqq-d fqiq q fTn}fw: r
g\oil eQa) q{q gfa: q sfr'|fril:nlqtl
<fqurr sRal q{q .nqr qrqff, uiiql I
alfcd ii fffiaFqlurr aR *faa: ntetl
ng ng q cra1 wgrfitrraF6q ?iqrr 
qfea: qlfwa] Erfq ?r{tfiq$fir{?: tt I qtl

I l-18. YET OTHER AVASTHAS .. . Lajjita, Garvita,
Kshudita,Trushita,Mudita and'Kshobhitar et heotherk indso f
(six) states due to thc planets. Placed in the 5th housci f a
planet is associatedwith a node or with the Sun,Saturno r
Mars, it is in Lajjitavastba. If a planct is in exaltationo r in
Moolatrikona, it is Garvitavastha.T he avastbai s Kshudita
if the planet is in an enemy'ss ign, or conjunct an enemy
or aspected by an enemy or even be in conjunctionw ith
Saturn. If a planet is in a watery sign and be in aspect
to a malefic but not a benefic,t he avastha is called Trushita.
If a planet is in a friendly sign, or conjunct or aspected
by a benefic or is conjunct Jupiter, it is said to be in
Muditavastha.I f a planeti s conjunctt he Sun and is aspectedb y
or conjuncta  malefic or is aspectedb y an enemy,i t is saidt o
pe in Kshobhitavhshta"T he houses occupiedb y a planet in
kshuditavasthao r Kshobhitavasthar e destroyed.

qti *lq qlgeri qirTr+q qfoei: r
qi{rsE(|qqrisr qqirEq: qirfiliq: il tQ.tl
erql;d q gil {{d qEFffw ri aitga: r
Err€ti ilar Qfa: ffit ir r€rsq{ rtRotl
r{rqri feqa} rr€r afivaeqfeerttnltr 
{lea: qlfqa} qrfq q rr} 3:<tqrq?riqll ltl
girFqri q*q€q qfiqal qE qq  q l
girqtlft q+fl€q gtfratafn q{qr rrRtrr



452 Brihot Parasara Hora Sastra
qfifqilqfqil{*q e.a* qrq qT u?q I
fffi ilq il{ ftqqTgfaqkq ! tr11u

, 19.23 The learned s"h ould estimate the effectsd ue to a
housei n the manner cited above (i.e. with the help of various
kinds ofavasthas),a fter ascertainingth e strengtha nd weakness
(of the variousp lanets). Weakplarletsc auser eduction in good
effecsw hile strongero nesg iveg reatere ffects.I f a planetp oiited
in the l0th house is in Lajjitavastba, Kshudhitavasthao r
Kshobhitavasthath, e personw  ll alwaysb e sbbjectcdto  miseries.
If a planet in the 5th house is in Lajjitarasrha, therew ill be
destnrctiono f progeny,o r therew ill be only ore survivingchild.
surely the wife of the nativc will die if thire is a planeli n the
?th in Kshg6ti0avasthao r in Trushitavastha.

lt.nttqntqgd1qd fi,Filq€i{ffi iuq r
rtrtqrd qr$qFdrrf fslierkq rrfcilrq uRYtl

rlfr lfee*i qnnrFlrfq{flqr
Rwenmqqrqfwlere Rtcqq1 

rlqffnnfqf,r* qfqqTrrnqrlil
RgfETdffi gfbfrarf<w{t:u q{t|

fr{rft afv"qirqrdq{ndffrq rrdrrqqfilf rrfaemq r
giltterrrq{r r{ 1w t|qrqlfqefq r eflqq i rrlqrr
d*|Mq ad ftrieqffi 3iqfd q,r,GeqI  
Fqlfn fmaq{faqrui qrrf"cqrqrmot*,.M uRetl

qfuerv'r<nni nlr,r\rfana:
qRqnqlMu{tan Fqriqq r

nFqrfq ftgql*rtqrqr ;rtrqr-
qfqqqqfrfr ul ferlal f{qnrd || i  c || 

Efaacmi €trr{rritiTrqri
qqfil ttqfi&rrt aaawqffumrrr: 

F{riq
qFlFilTRrrql Trn{rfr: ait 111q1,



Chapter4 5 $t
24-29. EFFECTS OF 1A.RVITAVASTHA ETC. zA ptanet

in Garvitavasthaw ill cause happinessth rough o.* h;;;;;;
gardensr, egalhood, skill in arts,f inancialg ainsa t alt t;mes,a nd
improvement-inb usiness. A pranet in Muditavastnaw iliJivc
residencesc, lothes, ornaments,h appinessfr om tandsa no rvirq
happinessf rom relativesr, iving in royar paracesd, estructiono f
enemiesa nd acquisition of wisdom and rearning. A praneti n
f,ajjitavaltba will give aversion to God, loss of intittigencc,
lossof child, interesti n evir speechesa nd ristressn.ssio"go;
things. A planct in Kshobhitavasthaw iil give acutep ei'ur11
evil disposition,m iseries,f inancial debacresd,i streseto  ieet anJ
obstructiont o incomed ue to royal wrath. A planeti n xrnuatite_
vastha witl cause downfal due to grief and passiong, .#;
account of relatives, physical decline,t roublesr r"r'.-n..i.i
financialdistress,l osso f physicasl trengtha nd an ."lipr.o mini
due to miseries. A planet in Trushitavasrhaw ill causeo iseases
through associationw ith females, leading overw icked(or eviij
deeds,lo sso f wealthd ue to one's own men, physicar* "uto"rrl
misericsc ausedb y evil peoplea nd declineo f honour.

{rqi q}e*{r ir leqrforqfiT{rtrrI 
ItTI{trtrT{q lsqTw IEIi ERrei mnr,,tot,
sTrqdq lqi ria 1td ferei q itg6q r
f{si rqrort iaai q Fernfiraqrfqaittlttl
tfrrqei qirda€a ii nfrgrlq r
f{eii R*Tri Tqftt{ fqq}qiq utRtl
qftr€ld iT{n qran*ucq €{r tq: t
<fufqq qiq nrri d'd wi ftl}clq nlttl
qrqfaq,Eqr0eqr g{: RwrrttqtEI 
;TTqEF{(TT<qTBd

Qiloq qfq&Fdil: ulvtl
(q} rrsir ilcrT tqT{qFi quqari cm I
si a{ q ig*i gi {}f" frdltq utrrr
r0 iTIuIr: glqnrq ezi sil?q qnti r
m} ' 

aqqql t{ rrd eenEqgGequ1tq tl



is4 Brihat Parasar-aH ora Sastta

f"fq{qt q iqi*: fl g"f€dfrsr €{aI I
Efieriq fq+at q diqii s,qqrsrrEuql ell

30.37. CALCALATION OF SAYANA AND OTHER
AVASTHAS : I now tell you of the avasthasv iz' Sayana,
UpavesanaN, etrapani,P rakasana,G amana, AagamanaS, abha,
Aiama, Bhojane, Nrityalipsa, Kautuka and Nidra, and the
chesthaso f sucha vasthas. Note the numbero f the stars( [rom
Aswini). occupied by thc planet for which Avastha is to be
calculated.M ultiply that number by the numbcr denoted by
the planet (Sun l, Moon 2 etc.). The figurc so arriveda t be
again multiplied by the number of ' Navamsa the planet
is in. Add to this the number of birth astcrismt,h e number
of ghatis of birth and the number o[ signs the ascendant
gained from Aries. This figure be divided by 12 and the
iemainderw ill indicatet hecorrespondingA vasthao f the planet'
The sub state in the said Avastha can be found out thus :
Multi2ly the figure denoted by the Avastha concerneo( i c'
Sayanal,  Upavesana2  etc)  by the samef igureand incrcaseit 
by the figured enotedb y the Anka valuc for the first syllablco f
the native's personal name. Dividc the products o obtained
by 12.-  The remainderth ereo f be furthcr increascbdy  constant
planetary additamdtrts, thus : Sun 5, Moon 2, Mars 2,
Mercury3 , Jupiter5 , Venus3 , Saturn3 , Rahu4 (ald Ketu 4)'
(Here the planetm eanst he one for whom the substatei s being
known.) The product so arriveda t be divided by 3. In th
processif  the remainderi s l, it is Drishti,' if 2 Clreshta nd if 0
Vicheshta.

Notes:  So far narrated are .three differentg roupso f
Avasthas. Thc present Avasthasa re calledS ayanadAi vasthas.
Thesea rc of supremei mportancea s compared  to the other kinds
of Avasthas.

' The following formula may be adoptedt o know about the
planet'sA vastha( Sayanadi)a t birth.

(sx,pxn) * (a*g- j-r) :  
Avastha

l 2

Whereas 's' denotesth e serialn umberof the star occupied
by thc planet, counted from Aswini at birth; 'p' denotest he



Chapter 45 455

statuso f the ptanetc ounted from the Sun (i.e. Sun l, Mercury
4 etc; 'n' denotes the planet's Navamsa position (i.e. I to 9
Navamsas);'a ' denotes Janma Nakshatra (or ruling star, i.e. the
one occupiedb y the Moon); 'g' denotes the ghati in which birth
took place (i.e. 20gh 2 vigh is 2lgh) and 'r' denotes the
ascendant'os rder counted from Aries (i.e. Cancerd  Leo 5, so
on and.sof orth).

In placeo f 'n' given above, some translatorsin terprett he
word 'Amsa' as degreeoccupiedb y the planetw hich is obviously
not correct. [n this connection, the reader'sa ttentioni s drawn
to Balabhadra's Hora Ratna, ch 3 wherein the author
Balabhadrah imselfg ivcs an example for the Sun beingi n the
7th Navamsao f Leo and thus he consideredo nly 7 as muliiptier.
He hasn ot taken in to account the Sun's degree. He quotes
AdhbbutaS egara as his authority for calculationo f Sayanadi
Avasthas. It will thus be clear that 'Amsa' is Navamsaa nd
not degreein  this context.

. Also pleascn ote that Aagamanavasth(at he 6th one) is
known as Gamanechchavasthbay somee xponents-

Takc a casenow as an example with the following data.
The Sun in Krittika Nakshatra, 3rd Navamsa of Taurus( i.e in
?o l2'Taurus), birth star Krittika, birthat 30gh3 jvigh, and

ascendanti n Scorpio. With these we produce following
information,k eepingt he forrnulag ivena bove

S : 3 L : 3
P : l  g - 3 t
n :3  r : 8

Henceto  find out thc Avastha,
(3x l x3 ) * (3 *31*8 )  
- 12 _

f-j:remaind3er 
With the help of remainder3 , we count threeA vastnas

from Sayana. This indicatesN etrapaniA vasthaf or thb Sun.
Similarly for 9 planets,s uch Avasthasb ef ound out. In

a givenh oroscope,t he factors 's', 'g'and 'r' wifl be identicar
for all the 9 planets while factors .s', .p' and .n, will be
variable.

_ After knowing the Avasthas of various planets, we have
to find out the sub state of each Avastha. The foimula for
knowing sub-stateis  made in two stiagesa,s  under.



-Brihat 
456 parasaraH ora Sastia

Stag-  el ,.( tAix- :A )  +  r "
*

Stage2:  (R*pa)  + 3:  substate
Where 'A' is Avastha, .fs' is first syllable's valuew ith

referencet o the rrative's personaln ame, R is remainder in
stagel , and'pa'is planetarya dditamentd enotedi n the abo'e
slokas,s uch as Sun 5, Venus3  etc. The remaindera t stage2 
will denote sub state such as I is Drishti, 2 cheshta; n;
O vicheshta.

we need information about Anka varueo r valuef or first
ryllableo f the name of a person. Thesea re :

I for 3f, s', 6, g, E rI 
' and ?

2 for {, GI,s f, q, ;[, T and lI
3 for B, r[, t, if, T, T and $
4 for (, E[,g , g, tD,T  and rt
5 for *, q,4 E, if, 11a nd q

Now with the above data, find the sub statcf or the Sun
in NetrapaniA vastha as per the exampreg ivens upra. rirri
syllable of the namei s "Sa" (fl). Hence,

, stageI : : RemaindeI r 
"3*l 

stage2, f# :  o
Remainderz ero indicatess ub statea s vicbeshta, in Netra-

pani Avastha.

ltel qqcd iid ,M, fsqd saq r
ftM si{ Tqcqt{ foasei f*g) r,1orr
{wq{ quqf q qitsrq scnscrFrq 
g6qTi finiiq qq iid iTqrrT ri, rrlerr

38-39. EFFECTS OF CHESHTA ETC. : If rhe sub state
is Drishti in an Avastha, the resultsb eing statedf or the Avastha
will be medium, fuil in cheshta and negrigiorein  vicheshta.
The good and bad effectso f pranetsb e dec-ipheredb ased on the



Chapter 45 451
strengtha nd weaknesos f the planets. In exaltation,t he planets
revealeffectsin  a pronoundedm annerdue to (good)a vasthas.

Notes : If a planeti s in good Avasthaa nd is in Cheshta
(sub state), the good effects will be full. If the sub statei s
Vicheshta,t he good cffectsa ren eutralised.l f the substatei s
Drishti, good effectsw ill be feebly felt. A planet in exaltarion
will give the good effectsd ue to a particular Avasthai n a fuller
measure.

If a planeri s in bad Avasthaw ith Chesbtaa s sub state,
the evil effectswill be less. With Drishti, evil effectsw ill be
visiblyf elt. If Vichesbtais  sub state,bad effectsa re neutralized.
In debilitation, the evil effects due to an Avastha will be
pronounced.

Eachp lanetgivesd ifferente ffects-goodor bad-according
to the Avastha. No constant evaluationb e madej ust with the
nameof an Avastha. This is what is conveyedin the following
slokas.

q;Erfi  qrlq] E6 uf fi Totri  1e eaq ;s.sr'r  fqf qnrlq: r
{ui ga qtag(:ce{i qE}sot$ilg{:| q{ qqrd:u vcr l
ERranr<fqil(yfrclt fs{r<lsafqqat qr: TrTt{l 
rolrfqa: <<{ ;rsakq: '$T q€r ig€*ret: 'vt tl
ir{: qqr{?Eur} fq'a* q*qnr<'t qfiGrq{a: I
qqrgdt nq5qfqqdt ft{rfqilq} qfE laqrql uyRtl
smFqn: lRguifa<: qr1lg EIqiil irggwT6'atf 
q(Iqdt g"E1Tsqvrto'l trtfi1{Ii q?qlq lQe{lri *vlll
sqmmdt f6'q g:qqrdt HETqil qlqqqfqilq I
$TfiiF: mlqqq) {ilerQarfumQ rrqi {nrq: uyytl
q1e11{il} qqat(Qt] EdtitTtlrri qqqfqtfq: t
qffiTgqrql qfqql fqqfiftr*.1 TqEr:5 qfil: Essr:t ry{n

qwrrt Qt a<:q <]qmrqast:
rcni<eagfral fEqmi g!ilr'r: I

.Tg ;urriqi{fl qqTP.qiTl €rqdt
fqfqafqeqiRFl : Ein$'FIIE(: tt(: I tvq I I



458 Brihat Parasara Hora Sastra

filfq* Rg.rof: t1Et tettltitir: q|FTqfr:E TrGfqtI 
u{nff6} qq}dftqrq} finrdl AEI itifi ilvetl

ire'Brl: ql qt qfl qiil Q *nt r
qttiq ilr'fqnlaqqT ilcn q qrir rrlcr{

TEtrrt{TFwtRSfarr:t nrffi qfa It yc l I
fqaal*, ftil qfiea: qfiea: weqfqqnEqqaTqrFaa:r 
Tlwgcqq) rtsosi v{ar lufe.qrrri qfn{trra* uvq11
q*enraililf qq) arqqrl wrrat €rrreft{rfi(lrftqer: 
qqffqrq(ilsi{ sqn{: +raqfsefisar{tg ar r\t rr{ort
frarqql({afrri qeat firlril fra-<qqgrfr1 
tqt fqi{t qsfafirq rceQrfq: qilfilaniilu: u{ttl

40-51. EFFECTS OF THE SU/V'^SA VASTHAS AT
BIRTH .' If the Sun is in Sayenavasthath, e nativew ill incur
digestivedeficicncy,m any diseasess, toutnesso f legs, bilious
vitiation,u lceri n the anus,a nd hearts trokes. Lf the Suni s in
Upavesanavasththae,  nativew ill suffcrp overty, will carry lbads,
will indulgei n litigationsb, e hard-hcartedw,i cked,a nd will lose
in his undertakings. If thc Sun is in Netrapania vastbat,h e
native will always be happy, wise,h elpful to others,e ndowed
with prowessa nd wealth, very happy, and will gain royal
favours. If the Sun is in Prakasanavasthtah,c  nativew ill be
liberali n disposition,will haveplenty of wealth,b e a significant
speakeri n the assemblyw, ill perform miny meritoriousa cts,be
greatlys trong and be endowed with charming beauty. If the
Sun is in Gamanavasthathe native .will be disposedto  live in
foreign placesb, e miserable,i ndolent,b ereft of intelligencea nd
wealth,bedistrcssed ue to fear and be short-tempered.I f the
Sun is in Agamanavasthath, e nativew ill be interestedin .others'
wives,b e devoido f his own men,be interestedin  movements,
skilful in doing evil deeds,be dirty, lll disposeda nd be tale-
bearer. If the Sun is in Sebhavastbath, e nativew ill bedisposed
to help others, be alwaysendowed with wealtha nd gems,b e
virtuous, endowed with lands, new housesa nd robes,be very



Chapter 45 459

strong, very affectionate to his friends and be very kindly

lirpo-r"d. it ttt" Suir is in Aagamavasthat,h e nativew ill be

disiressedd ue to enemiesf,i ckle-mindede, vil'minded,e maciated,

devoido [ virtuous.actsa.n d intoxicatedw ith pride' If the sun

i. io nnolnn"vastha,t he native will experiencep ains in joints'

wi l l losemoneyonaccoutt tofothers' females'wi l lhavestrength
J..fining off ando n, be untruthful, will incur head-achcws'i l l

eat renrnant food and will take to bad ways. If the sun is in

Nrityalipsavasthat,h e native will be. honouredb y the learned'
tret rimsetras cholar, will havek nowledgeo f poctryetc., andb e

adoredb y kings on the earth. lf the Sun is in Kautukavastha'
lfr" nutiu, will always be happy, be endowedw ith spiritual

knowledge,w i l lper fo rmsacr i f i c ia l r i t cs ,w i l lmoveamids tk ings '
will havef car from enemiesb, e charming-faceda nd bc endowed
wittr tnowtedge o[ poetry. lf the Sun is in Nidravasthat,h e

" native will posseses yes laden with sleepines(si' e' be always
drowsy;,w ilt l ive in foreign( or distant)p lacesw, il l incur harm
to wifc and will facef inancial destruction'

. N o t e s : B a l a b l r a d r a g i v e s s o m e a d d i t i o n a l i n f o r m a t i o n i n
regard to planetary Avasthas based on 'Adbhuta Sagaram"

The samei s cor4espondinglayd dedf or the benefito f the reader'

along with my commenis,a voiding repetitiono f thc viewso f

Parasara.
The Sun in Upavesanavasthwa ill make one an artisan'

black in complexion, devoid of learning' miserablea nd .serve
i

oifr.*. ln Nltrapani Avastha-all kinds of happiness,.f  the

;;;i; in the 5th, 9th and 10tho r 7th house' In other houses'
ihis Avasthao f the sun wilt give eyed iseaseasn d enmity with all.

Il in Prakasanavasthath, e nativew ill be meritorious,r eligious,

iit.tof, will enjoy pleasuresb, e equal to a princeand enjoy the

statuso f Kubera, tire Hindu god of wealth' However't he said

Piuk"*n"uustha of the Sun placedi n the ?th or the 5th house

*iii- out. losso f the first child and will pioduce many litiga-

tions. If the Sun is in Gr,nanavastha,t he native will incur
t

diseaseo f the feet and be very mean' If in Agamanavastha'h e

;;; i" l2th or in 7th will destroyp rogenya nd will give very

limited wealth. If in Aagamavasthat,h e sun will give many
' 

;l;;;;-, ugl-y appearancea, nd foolishness' However' he will
 

gi". *."frn. Thc Sun in Bhojanavasthai n the 9th housew ill



460 Brihat parasara Hora Sastra
cause nany hindrancesto  spirituala nd religiousu ndertakings.
In other housest,h is positionw ill causeh eada nd o, Oir*r!r,
apart from joint pains. Thoughp arasaras tatest hat the 
with native

the sun in Kautukavastha wiil have fear rro, 
Balabhadrae xempts suche vil effectf ur the 6th t,ourcp "norr-i,,nio-ii-.".]
The Suni n Kautukavasthian  other housesw ill give 
daughterst,w o -.t". 

wives,i tch, excellencleib, erality "t f" r;h;;;ri;;;;;
in Nidravasthath, e nativew iil be predisposetdo  incur pir", uJ
elcphantasisb, e absolutely very peacelesasn d will be iiable 
Ioseh is to

firstc hitd.

*g,d erqTnri vrqi igvm* r
qrilt qifarilqsq m,rqlf etfEirnm:n {Rrl
tqrFaa)f fEqflflfldfrqrG*aq lfl egw:f i6](: I
smldrr{t q<|ffiQd} erqrni igr*vrart u{ltl
iaclqrl q{qFrrt q{T*rit ?r} q*q r
snqtTtileqs) qd, gr{[<ra: REru tytl
qari lil?ilt qaqfil fqrrd q Er;ri

fqqrn: qisri fqqiTgvrrni<arfrrrar 
rEr{tnrFrrr mem'frgrnFTqqrqftTq ar

feler qlqrfq: gqqgf{rf *t,fn**1 ||  { { || 
fqfrili q$rrtrl fqmmi filqr: Tqrrt rrl qear 
r<rferii: qfrt'tqqqTl)q irerq* qqi *g., ,,1q,

fqqnrrqi qdl qrEq'fTfTt q} q+a r
UqrqFnal Elal qfhalqfqqfq-,,,ro,,
qraqaqfl?q) Trcr{t+aqr,q}

<ftqtaqqfiIfn: vnlag-mrffi rrr r
sqfq qEft qtil \

qrefEri {rvrtt 
rtqfer qqqdfkt'fafd 

Wnr: tuctl
fqqrilqq* qflfr qruTql u{Sfra: r
ScqrqeiB rnri: Trl,rlrfl goad* dt ut\rr



Chapter 45 461
qlqi qgfs guiaraw qnqrqsrEilr{<cn qrq l

_qrf,frfil afrargarg<*e {tq a fqiai lrs{ uQotl
gafa"emt irii qq+ qflqF;R: I
f f f ia (€il{q FUT qnm* nriqr rqlrr

r\5qq?i qilqfn qri rrqfil TqFi Er qaqiq{ |
sTqning uat gwvtd anrqarfinTrurq€(EnrqqR tl

ffi wqft qnqrqi r-mei dtqt rT6q{ |
{lsgnvf}a'cfrflqr{T: fqtanqt *fa fqfqagii: rrqltr

52.63. EFFECTS OF THE MOON'S AVASTHAS AT
BIRTTI .' lf the Moon is in Sayanavasthath, e nativewill be
honourables, luggish,givent o sexual ust, and will facef inancial
destruction. If the Moon is in Upavesanlvasthath, e native will
bc troublcdb y diseasesb,e  dull-witted, be not endowcd with
mentionablew ealth (i.e. will have only negligiblew ealth), be
hard-hearted, will do unworthy acts and will steal others,
wealth. If the Moon is in Netrepania vastba,t he native will be
troubled by great diseases(l ong lasting in nature),b e very garru-
lous, wickeda nd will indulgei n bad deeds. Should the Moon
be in Prakasavasthath, e nativew ilt be famousi n the world, will
havehis virtuese xposedth roughr oyal patronageb, e surrounded
by borses, elephants,f emalesa nd ornamentsa nd will visit
shrines. If the Moon is in Gamanavasthaw, ith decreasingra ys.
the nativew ill be sinful, cruel and alwayst roubledb y affii-ctions
of sight;i f with increasingra ys,t he nativew il bedisiressed ue
to fear. If the Moon is in Agamanavasthat,h e native wiil be
honotrable, will suffer diseaseosf  feet, will secretlyin dulge in
sinful acts,be poor and devoido f intelrigencea nd happinessl If
the Moon is 'in sabhavasthat,h e native wiil be eminenta mong
men,honouredb y kings,a nd kingso f kings, be very beautifui
wills ubdue the passiono f women,b e skilful in sexuaal ctsa ni
be virtuous. If the Moon is in Agamavasthat,h e nativew ill be
garrulous,a nd virtuousa nd if the saidM oon is of dark fortnight
the native will have two wives, be sick, highly wicked and-be
violent. If the Moon is in Bbojanavasthat,h g native will be
endowed with honour, cooveyancesa, ttendants,s ocials tatus,



462 Brihqt ParasaraH ora Sastra

wife and drughtcrs, provideds hei s Full (X.i sri); if shci s in
dark fortnightt hesea uspicious€ ffectsw ill fail to come. If the
Moon is in Nrityalipsavasthan d b'eendowedwith (fortnightly)
strengtht,he nativew ill be strong,will havck nowledgeo f songs
and be a critic of bcautyof things;if  tbe said Moon is of dark
fortnignt,t he personw ill be sinful lf the Moon is in Kautuka-
vasthat,he native will attainkingship,lo rdshipover wealtha nd
skill in sexuaal ctsa nd in sportingw ith harlots. Slrouldin crea-
singM oon conjunctJ upitcrb e in Nidravasthath, e nativew ill be
quitee minent. Devoidof Iupiter'sconjunctioni,f  the Moon is
in the saidA vasthat,he nativewill loseh is wealthon accounto f
females,a nd femalej ackalsw ill be cryinga roundhisa bode( as
thougti if werea cernetery).

Notes:  With the Moon in the ascendanint  Sayanavastha,
the nativewill incur diseaseosf  rectum, be poor and highly
irritable. In other houses,t his condition will not givet hese
defectss o specifically. If weakMoon be in this Avasth4( in any
house),t he right sideof the native'sb ody will incurd amages
causedb y fire. Therewill bedamageto  teethi f the Moon is in
UpavesanavasthaT. he lv{oon in Netrapani Avasthaw ill bring
eye diseasese, lephantasise, tc. and will mdke the native
garrulous. If the Moon is in Gamanavasthai,t  will cause
diseaseosf "theh eada nd brain.Therew ill be two wivesa nd many
daughtersif  the Moon is in Agamavastha.B hojanavasthoaf  the
Moon will bring fear from snakesa nd water. The Moon in
Nrityalipsavasthwai ll givea  very leanbodyand lastings ickness.
Kautukavasthao f the Moon will confer many sons. lf the
Moon is in Nidravasthai n the l0th, the nativew ill undergo
miserieson account of his progeny. The Moon in the 5th or
the 7th with the sameA vasthaw ill bringa ll kindso f auspicious
effects. Shouldshe join Rahui n the 5th or 7th, herselbf eing
in Nidravasthae, verythingo f the nativei s destroyeda rrdh e will
be ladenwith a thousandb lemishes.

{lqa qg'drga qqq{iT} !ilil vla t
q6ilI fi'o€nT g{il} EEoIT tT fqsiqa: llt(Yll

E-dtqil qtftal q{: FrttEsiqil{t faaqi 5IIT?$I: 
ert.{ Ruif ftwu{qta} aqgaqigqi{qeq: llQttt



Chapter 45 463

TtE[t XfqEa'l T'i iavfugwria: t
afirdilr qilq;q$I Eqivtmn qqtl

qrrnt TrI€qTfqErvq:'{ l*i erqrdlvrwuda: rw n$b: r
gA qge garttaf<alrr) rrlargurra rcq] et fqqrf,:n q\etl

qqi qqi y*sgfa;i EqqtaqTi afaamvq: r
qgatrfffi'lcxria $m agumm] ag$ftm: ntetl
qmqi lvrnret qfqrrTrdiqr6 qtqtT{tdt t
TqB?ar fqgemr vRqaqFdrq-{r<5}r rlt rrqrrr

gH {FfiRTrfi'ilHgmc} qfeqqt frrq:
nloi$ rgi ewrgmt faurfa{tag: qT{| 

slqia-{eqrii-
sq{dt tqqqqu} agu{t qr{t q Eta'qt q: ue.otl 

anq* rr<fr qfqi qt} ufmfrQal nag<: r
$Rnqfa: gatr".itu \eIrl

q1qi fqcaqlft q qfr ffiil gfrr
dtq6{tq} frid wgv) qneFqau: \eRll

gafe<rrt ngt ufitqrfqfl<{r{rfnrutfa qq'lqt: t
€oi.qtqq-fl*: qil qfisdlErr€{neral <rqi q}tqiar it'sitl

rilgqfrf nfe rlg* gil fragalftlfral ua' t
d 1{ti6fiea: fua} grat,lqrni: tt\evtt

fqar*qi q* qJ} nldt q'fqqafqil: I
qtif qfqRqa& Tgoql qE{tRa: ll\e{ll

64.75. EFFECTS. OF AYASTHAS OF MARS AT
BIRTH .' If Mars is in Sayanavasthtah,e  nativew ill be troubled

'n 
by wounds, itch and ulcer' If Mars.bt Upavesanavasththae, 
native will be strong, sinful, untruthful, eminent,w ealthya nd
berefto f virtues. If Mars be in the ascendanta nd be in Netra-
pani Avasthat here will be penury;i n other housesthis statewill
confer rulershipo f a city. Should Mars be in Prakasavastha'
the native will shine with virtues and will be honouredb y the



464 Brihat ParasaraH ora Sastra

king. Mars in Prakasavasthina  the 5th housewill, howevcr,
cause losso f children and of wife. lf Mars is in the saidstate
and be rvithRahu,a  severe(p ositionalf)a ll will descendo n the
native.ShouldM ars'bei n Grmanavasthtah e nativew ill bea lways
roaming,w ill havef earo f multipleu lcers,w ill incurmisunder-
standingws ith femalesw, il l beafllictedb y boils, itchese tc. and
will incur financial decline. If Mars be in Agamanavastbtah,e 
nativewill bc virtuous,e ndowedrv ithp reciousgems,w ill ado-re
a sharp sword,w ill walk with the (majesticg) ait of an elephant
(impartings urpriscin  the onlooker)w, il l destroyh is enemieasnd
will removet he miserieso f his pecple. If Mars be in Sabhava-
sthaa nd be in exaltationt he natlvewill be skilful in conducting
wars,w ill hold the flag of righteousnesaslo ft and be wealthy; if
Mars be in the said statei n the Sth or 9th, the native will be
bercft of learning,i f in the l2th childlessnesasn d no wifea nd no
friendsw ill result,and if Mars be in other housesth an thesei n
the said Avastha, the native will be a scholar in a king's court
(i.e. be a poet laureate),b e very wealthy,honourablea nd chari-
table. If Mars be in Agamavasthath, e native will be devoid of
virtuesa nd goodd eedsw, ill bed istressedb y diseasesw. ill acquire
diseaseso f the root of the ears (mt W t{r: & C qrilit ssqif
etc.), and severeg out pains,b e timid and will befriende vil lot.
lf Mars be with strengthwhile in Bhojanavasthath, e nativew ill
eat sweet-fooda nd if be devoid of strength, the nativew ill
indulgei n baseactsa nd be dishonourable.I f Mars be Nrityrlips-
avastha,t he native will earn wealth through king and will be
endowedw ith fullnesso f gold, diamondsa nd coralsi n his house.
If Mars be in Kautukrvasthathe native will be curiousi n disposi-
tion and be endowed with friends and sons,i f Mars be simul-
taneouslye xalted,t he native will be honouredb y the king and
the virtuousa nd be himselfv irtuous. If Mars be in Nidravastha,
the native will be short-temperedd. evoid of intelligencea nd
wealth, be wicked, fallen from yirtuous path and troubled by
diseases,

Notes : If Mars is in Sayanavasthaat birth, the nativew ill
be libidinous, learned, intelligent and irritable. Should this
Avasthai n particularo ccur. in the 5th or in the 7th, the native
will loseh is first wife and first child as well. If Mars in 5th
beingi n Sayanavasthias relatedt o Saturn or Rahu,t he native's



Chapter4 5 465

headw ill be severedwhile with other malefics relatedt o Mars
iT the saidstateears/handw ill be cut off.

ShouldMars be in Upavesanavasthina  thea scendant,t he
nativeryill be extremely sinful,will incur severadl iscasesin, di-
genta nd most unpeaceful. If the said Avasthaoccursf or Mars
in the 9th house, the nativewill lose wholeof his wealtha part
from his wife and progeny. Mars in Netrapani Avasthai n the
ascendanwt ill give povertya nd will destroyt he ndtive'sw ife and
progeny; in other housest his confers on the nativea ll kinds of
wealth and happinessfr om wife and children. However,t he 2nd
housep ositiono r the Tth housep osition of Mars in Netrapani
Avasthaw ill causef ear from lions and snakesa part from giving
earningsfr om lands.Furthetrhe native'swife will predeceasheim .
ShouldM ars bein Prakasanavasthina  thc 5th or in the 7th house,
the native will losehis wife and all children. Placedi n the 5th
houie in Prakasanavasthiaf  Mars is conjuuct Saturn, thc nbtivc
will kill co',ys.ShouldM ars be in Gamanavasthath, e nativew ill
be active in his assignmentsw, iil incur diseaseso f thc joints,
burning painsi n eyes,d entalaffiictions and thc like, will have
fear from dogs and will adoret he guiseo f a female. Thcse
effectsa re for the placemenot f Mars in the ascendant. In other
houses, Mars in Gamanavasthaw itl bring royal favours,l eader-
ship and luxuriesof the life.

Shifting over to sloka 69 of our tcxt, in the contert
of Mars being in Agamanavastha, the sage uses "rrq€ailI"
which hasb een, however, interpreted as 'elephant killer' by
somec ommentators. It is actually an indeclinablep article and
conveyst he meaningt hat the nativew ill walk with the majestic
gait of an elephant( impartings urprisei n the onlookers

Mars in Agamanavasthaw ill cause piles and diseaseso f
rectum.

If Mars is in Bhojanavasthao r in Sayanavasthian  the 5th
house,o r in the 8th house, there will be untimelyd eathf or the
native. In other houses, Bhojanavsathao f Mars will confer
wealth. Should Mars. be in Nrityalipsavasthaa nd be in the
ascendant2, nd, 7th or l0th, the nativew ill receivea ll kinds of
happiness;t here will be miseriesg alorei f Mars is in the 8th or
9th a part from incurring untimely death. In other housest,h is
stateo f Mars will make the nativea kin to Kubera. Mars in the



466 Brihat Parasora Hora Sastra

?th or in the 9th in Kautukavasthaw ill gives everadl iseasesa rd
death of first child and wife. In other housest,h is statew ill
confers cholarshipr,a rious kinds of wealth,t wo wivesand more
female cbildren. In Nidravastha,M ars in the ascendant2, nd,
3rd, 9th, l0th or I lth, will give scholarshipf,o olishnesasnd
poverty. The 5th houseor ?th house placcment of Mars in
this Avasthaw ill give many miseriesa nd many male children.
ShouldR ahuj oin Mars in Nidravasthai n any house the native
will have many wives,b e miserable,a nd will suffer from some
diseaseso n the surface of feet.

quqt q+{n q!tq} guqrmq,ur:I 
ffqt qrq* qil qirq: {rai gi ileqtl

rrtcgi q$Efit qffiti gurafnld: r
qfifneqtqg* ERrl Rt qti fqilgdt q!IGIIt:t eetl
firurfEfrqQ$ Qlrdq{il qr*

qilq{fr qelgesfa{ qIUftI 
grrqt grtelgQn flqt fi7,rI-

a

$fdnq1m ?t(M: l lgcl l

{rin ir{r{: cF[ glqfitt ftnrnl q?;gil {taq: t
fqis'qoi: (lTiTErriciillre etl

qrrrrrqa rrqfr rqi r6qr csurlqqtftA r
' qqi q frfqrmi <rfi fqf{ 1{q s{i:qq} fartrq llqoll

qqfa fuFc qqtaTgqri qaqrr*
qfc ffistfa: q{Er $qqfu: t
qiqfrqrrfl fl {lar {fetn n
qRlrtl-{q{qil:r rTftqdtg kvftu: lle lll

€nqt ilgfq qfqai qiil q;rir mfa Etatam t
adf<Fa<fqg "gqiTl slfrtr cqfr cn<tfufi 11qq11

qM qFrq q?qtlt trcl qf?rflrT{'UF<: scr qr{il: I
rr{rfrFqlF {re{qqd rt<g'egl t qwn? ra mn{wl llqllt



Chapter4 5 467
q(4fqcilq* ir;ril rTriirl qFpr6i1qrqeri: iga: r
freg*rart: rslqfisn: qtli sT<lnqrtitl wqa. 'cvtl
mlg* ffFd wqrr+ flTdrtt rtlefcfisiear qir r
q.ai ia* ErRq&fTar:  guQ goqgr-drfra , ugfa: lqltl
frrrfqil a;rqi a farrq<l vil aqfqgqrfkqlq: r
qilerimiqqqeq-crql &ilq qiql g?rrtFtitlll: ilqqtl

76-86. z EFFECTS erF MERCURI,,S AI/ASTHAS AT
BIRTH .' Should Mercury in sryanavasthab c in the asccndant,
the native will be lame and wifl have rcddish eycs (like thi
black bee);i f Mercury be in thc said Avasthai n other-houecc,
the native will be addictedt o licentiousp leasureas nd be wicked.
If Mercury be in uplvesanavrstbai n the ascendantt,h e native
will posses(st he sevenp rinciplc) virtues;i f aspcctedb y or con_
junct malefics, penury will result and if by bcnefrcsf inanciat
happinessw ill follow. If Mcrcury bc in Netrrprni Avrstba, thc
nativewill be devoid of learning,w is<!omw, ellwisherca nd satis-
faction but bc honourable;if  Mercury be in the 5th housei n the
said Avastha, the subjectw ill be berefto f happinessfr om wife
and sons,b e endowedw ith (more)f emale chitdrena nd will gain
abundant finance through royal patronage. IfMercury be in
Prakasavasthat,h e native will be charitable, merciful, meri-
torious, will cross the boundarieso f oceani n respecot f many
brancheso f learning,b e endowedw ith great faculty of discri-
mination and will destroy evil people. If Mercury be in
Gamanavasthtah e native will visit the court of kings on many
occasionsa nd Goddessl akshmi (denotingw ealth)w ill dwell in
his abode. If Mercury be in Agrmmavasthl, the same effects
due to his beingi n Gamanavesthwai ll fructify. If Mercury be in
sabhavasthaa. nd be in exaltation, the native will be afruent and
meritoriousa t all times,b e equalt o Kubera (tbe lord of wealth
in Hindu mythology) or be a king or a minister, be devotedt o
Lord vishnu and Lord siva, be virtuous and will attain finbl
emancipation. Should Mercury be in Agamavasthr,t he nativc
will serve basem en and gain wealtht hereby and will havet wo
sons and one fame-bringing daughter. If Mercury be in
Bhojanavasthat,h e native will face fnancial tossest hroulh litiga-
tions, will physicallyl oseo n accounto f fear fron kingli e. JiU



il6E Brihat ParasaraH ora Sastra

become thin due to royat wrath), fickle-mindeda nd will be
berefto f physical and conjugal felicity. If Mercury be in
Nrltyelipsrvastba,t he native will be endowodw ith honour, cen'
veyancei, corals( i.e. gemse tc.), sons, friends, prowessa nd
rccogoitioni n assemblyd ue to his scholarshipi;f  with the said
statJMarcuryb e in a malefic'ss ign the nativew ill be addictedt o
prostitut$ and will long for licentiousp leasures. If Mercury
Lc in Krututrvlstbr, and be in the ascendant,t he native will be
skitful in music;i f be in the 7th/8th with the said Avastha one
will be addictedt o courtezaoas nd if in the 9th, the native will
bc meritorious and attain heavensa fter death. If Mercury be in
Nldravrcthr, the native will not enjoy comfortable sleep,b e
africted by neck or neck joint(wrfu) diseasesb,e  devoid of
ooborD, affiicted by miscriesg alore, will entcr into litigations
vith hie owD men will losew ealtha nd honour'

Notes : If Mcrcury is in the ascendant in Sayanavastha'
thc native will be a eunuch lacking productivity and pill be
dcvoid of a timb (whereas Parasarais  specificlys tating that thc
nativc will be lame), In other houses,t his Avasthao f Mercury
.will produce abstractp enury. Should Mercury be in his own
eign in Upavesanavastha,t he native will be endowed with all
kinds of happinessb, e meritoriousa nd liberal but will incur
discascso f the sight. If Mercury is in Prakasavasthath, e nativc
will bc interestedi n vedic lore and will continue to be rich

atthough he may be very charitable to give away anything'
Gamcnavasthao f Mercury, will causef ear from snakesa nd water.
Argamanavasthao f Mercury will bring many kinds of miseries
and a wicked wife. Mercury in the 5th or in the l2th in Sabha-
wsha will give many femalei ssues;i n the 7th it will make the
nativeb lack i'r oomplexion. Mercuryi n Agamavasthwa ill cause
urinary disorders. Bhojanavasthao f Mercury givesp overty and
n"oy iirr"r"s.at the time of one'se nd. If Mercuryi s in Nrityali-
psavasttrat,h e native will havef ive sons,4  daughtersa nd 2 wives'
ivlercury in Kautukavastba will cause piles and skin diseases.
Mcrcury in Nidravasthaw ill curtail longevity if the position is-in
ssccndanto r in the loth hous€, whereasi n other houses, this
Avasthao f Mercury witl give abundant wealth'



Chapter4 5 &9

qqffqfsQ g wgffqt qrqi qqrnft Sate: r
uR'rltag: <qftiqn: qa<tqfidtfrgd rIiXElrl:q ell
sqi{i qilqfa qf{ fr* qrqrq} qmirtta: t
ulcitcfaftgaaqf(acd: qeii{r€q{i({qt{ir: llcc ll

ieqrfq n1 1u11qlfqet rryal fq{na\ q<rtftrqr t
dtaltaFla: fiIg$: q{at qtcqT fqqurt{qqftfrg\ lle Qt

oqr{rqTi?d laqegcwd tkrg*
e 

eql tc:g=rt' re{afrq=ci rfawq t
str{i ngti 4aggm} qrqqg3

{nei q}5ni ufiqfa(qc?iq lfdr1 11Qoll
qrAit mfa qnq: qEr fqeq'iqaXffi get t
nFeRf AkuRccfis* Hqqfc gt q{ {il lrqtll
qmqi trrar qrsTltnq rq wg:urt qRrrar t
gaala amfegcaqal tqg{ qfta: qRqar ttQ'Rll

q(gq'qq+F[ qrqt$Eff$cilaq:
;Efq qqfE lqT fenrrfqqqrrri: I
rcg<rsq661 faeneftngd
ogft AR"Ail'lfEal qn?r:T qrel lelll

arnqq{qnqrrqadtqt$i gtr<rrri
qiarq?nlraafrruq<i fsils{qur ulq t
qilqlqraglrf,il?rqrd stsdtq qur rft:
nreErc<tfr:m r f6atrfaq: tieqrm: 11gvlt

ffi rafa iaaq<l qrq n€ tnd qfrual t
m g<R qqrri rei qIfqEntITqTqq firfr{ lletll

aafatqtG lTqqlal a- lqildt{Tru: eu u{ftq t
ir*mt ldtfoce: ,ifca: neqfirflqqql Q ssl tFI: llqqll

Sflq-* ffi19* rilrfr altt: <til
fiqtrqt q rrr-t61: Eittlt6ttt${:q dt I



ltto Brihat Parasara Hora Sastta
f{frlqeqHe* qeq rr;rtr ?TT
g* q.Qrrfr acfutaeqaEfoeiul: e\etl
S* fa.nqnqrRq dnrr nin{Frr 
r|Mqrrd q$i gomfiaaq1 r.ctl

87.98. EFFECTS OF JUPITER'S AT/ASTHAS AT
EIRTH : lf Jupiter.isi n Seyanavasthath, e nativew ill U. 
but will speaki n whispersb, e veryt awny in complexlonw, il"fr ""
prominent nagv!

c beeksa, nd wirt bave fear from enemies. rf Jupiter
be in Upavesanavaslhtah,e  nativew ill be garrulous,u .ry p-uO,
be troubled by king and enemiesa nd wiil tave urcerso ; 
shanks, i;;,

face and hgndl. If Jupitcr be in Netrapani .lvastt 
the nativew 

a,
ill be affiictedb y diseasesd,e voido f wialth, 

of music il;;;
andd ances,t ibidinous,t awnyi n complexion

attached a nd 
t o other be

castemtn. lf Jupiterb e in prakuseva.tn", 
native d"

will enjoy virlues, be happy, splendorousa na 
placcs *ifi nisii

holv to Lord..Krishna; 
' if Jupiier in thc saioe vasitra-

c al i x ted,t hc nativew 
s

ill attain greatnisas mong* .", U".q""f 
Kubera-the a

rord of wearth. if Jupiter is in Grmanavasrha 
native will thc

be adventurous,b e happy 
.scholarly on account of fricnds.

a nd endowed with various kinds of n,ealthu na .,.irt
Vedic learoing, If Jupiter bc in Agamanavasthe,.,* i;;fo;;;;
crccllentw omena nd the goddesso f wealth will neverr .i" 

. native's trr"
abode. If Jupiter be in Sabhavesthat,h e nativew ill

attain comparability with Jupiter (the God of speech)i " 
matter of speech. ;;

b 
;

e cndowedw ith superio. 
wealth, be rich with elephantsh, orsesa nd ch"aorri"oltrs,--iauoUai.w ;.i.l"i ;ie
rupremely learned. If Jupiter be in Agamavasthl,t he native
will bc endowcd with various conveyancesh, onours,, atiouu,
cbildren, wife, friendsa nd learning,b e iqual to a king, er;;ily
noble, fond of riterature and wil take tcr virtuous path. If
Jupiter be in Bbofuavasthe the native will alwaysU egete *cetteii
food- and horses, etephantsa nd chariotsw hije fiLst,oi, tfr"
g9{desso f Lucre, will neverl eave his house. If Jupiter 
Nri$alipsavrstha, be in

the native will receive royal honours, 
wealthy, be

e ndowedw ith knowredgeo f mora.rr aw 
(a brancho f learningd earing i*ij 

w ith magicalo r mysticarf" o"rami.u"trra"ries
to attain superhumanp owers), be supremea mongt he learned
and be a greatg rammarian. If Jupiterb c in Kautulr"ortn",it ,



Chapter4 6 111
native will be curious in disposition,v ery rich, will shine like thc
,S un in his circles, be exceedinglyk ind, be happy, honouredb y
lhe kings,e ndowedw ith sons,w ealtha nd just dispositionb e very
strong and be a scholari n the king's court. If Jupiter be in
Nidravastha,t he native will be foolish in all his undertakings,
will suffer irredeemablep enury and will be devoidof righteous
acts.

Notes : If Jupiter is in Sayanavasthath, e nativewill be fair
in complexionb ut will sufferf rom colic pains. This Avasthao f
Jupiter placedi n the ascendant?, th or lOthw ill, howeverg, ive
wealtha nd schotarsbip. Being in Upavesanavasthifa , Jupiter
occupietsh e 2nd, 3rd, llth or l2th, the native will be virtuous
and learned. In Netrapani Avastha, Jupiter will give head
diseaseasn d destroyt he undertakingo f the native. The native
will be evero f doubtful disposition. If Jupiteri s in Prakasana-
vasthai n a houseo ther than the ascendanat nd the l0th, the
nativew ill incur diseaseosf privitiesa nd rectum. Jupiteri n a
houseo ther than the 2nd, 5th, ?th and l0th, in Agamanavastha
will bring fear from snakes. Sabbavasthodf  Jupiter will make
the native rich through others' wealth. Should Sabhavastba
occur to Jupiter in the 8th or in the l2th, the nativew ill lose
everythingi n his life. If Jupiter ie in the asscendanint  Bhojana-
vastha, the nativew ill be fond of flesh,b e eloquent, libidinour
and be happy in every manner. In other housest han thc
ascendant,5 th and tlle 9th, this state of Jupiterw ill produce
many diseases. In NrityalipsavasthaJ, upiter placed in the
ascendant,s th, 9th or l0th will give abundantw ealthwhile in
other housesthis cannotb e expectedo f him. In Kautukavastba
he will givew ealth if in the ascendant,l 0th or 7th only. Jupiter
in Nidravasthaw ill make one miserable,s uffere ye diseaseasn d
wander all over. If he is in the l2th with this Avastha,t here
will be riches while this Avastha of Jupiter in the 5th' ?th or
lOth will destoryt he native'swife and children.

qa] qi{tqnfqa;a<'trft rrql qER}qqqGEa: qlnE I
uir 8q, ltq{ rqril qr<irrniqcilqarq ltQ.tll

afe r*gnal sqa{A iqqFlqErtnr€iqut: t
qqqq€qRerq Entrrnqfqqrcfq qnql?afa: ll I o oll



4t2 Erihat Parasara Eora Saislra

trqfirqt qrilit sfi wdt iqni qrq inq {E{ |
ffi frqrd Eilffiei qrqi qrtrrtttrTfe vrmrn iq n I oI  ll
T{rqt rj'rt fret r1ri} qrrnd'm{}alfiqri}q n: I
qqtqeq qq ernf qi ffeqfcuTm'armlgf+la} frq n { oQ tl

qql qi* q* arq qnr r dtqla r
qrfHql fqfiqrE amrflqRsTlfnerr:1  o 1 rr

qrrsi Tggi qf,qfr Hqq* rrgol:I 
qd{qrTrrdl fWt n{fq*rft ? u t oytl
qrrfifrard mfe r6ei wfa e6ur
qrrcqciwd:r cfu !i{far: foq mq}r 
rTrrnnqruni RgFfiefil uaqi:
qqFf Tt iililr qQgqrfr'irr ir{en: u{o{11

qnt qt{i q?qq} qGr{rqciT{irnirdte erfr: I
geen) fqqn) qalilqfqoqrfhdlfaf:i ar*rrqrfari*q rr1 o ! ,tl
qTgt ua1fuffifs6: rqn+rq111frqqTQcI{q 
wlqtt q}ffii !{arr wqrll{tq fieaqfica{?u f oetl

fi€qfqstiquTq Eqr qfa: e?iil qeqfer.flqt qrri,i r
tiwflut$nf{qnr,qfiqrd+goqlirq &n}rrla: n I oq11
*gsm{ qnqfd q* n*nit uqle qqiqq I
UuI fqw qffd ! it: qi{rn frqqk Htrlrn: 1loe11

qrilfl<tl fu hlrgvni ml r
qtfaqrlrt dlql qnml qqe r{\ rrllorr

99.IIO. EFFECTS OF AVASTHAS OF VENUS AT
BIRTH .' If Venus be in Sayanavasthat,h e native although
strong will incirr dentald iseasesb,e very short.temperedb, ereft
of wealth,w ill secku nion with courtezansa nd be licentious. If
Vcnus be in Upavesanavasthat,h e native will be endowed with
multitude of nine gems (affi1w) and golden ornanents, be
everhappy,w ill dcstroy enemiesb e honouredb y the king and
will bave highty increascdh onours. If Venusb e in Nedpnt



Chapter 45 473

Avasthai n the ascendant,t he 7th or lOth, therewill be losso f
wealth on agcount of sight afflictions (i.e. hcavy medical
expensesdue to severee ye diseasesa) nd if the saidAvastha
occurswhenVenusi s in other housest,h ere will be largehouses
owned by the native. Should Venus,be in Prakassvasthian 
own sign,e xaltationsign of friendly sign, the nativew ill sport
like a lofty elephantb, e equalt o a king and be skilful in poetry
and music. If Venusbe in Gamanavaitba,t he nativew ill not
havea long living mother, will lamcnt overs eparationfr om his
own peoplea nd will have fear from enemies. If Venusbe in
Agamanavastlrath, e native will command abundant wealth,
will undertaketo visit superiors hrinesb, e evere ntbusiastiacnd
will contract diseaseso f the hand and foot. If Venusbe in
Sabhovasthtah e nativewill earneminencein  the king's court, be
very virtuous-will destroy enemies,b e equal to Kubera in
rvealth,charitable,w ill ride on horscs and will be excellent
amongmen. If Venus is in Agamavasthat,h ere will be no
advent of wealth but troubles from enemiess, eparationfr om
childrenand relatives, diseasesa nd lack of pleasurefsr om the
wife. Should Vcnus be in Bhojanavastht,l he nativew ill be
distressed ue to hunger, disoasesa nd many kinds of fear from
enemiesa nd if the said planeti s in Virgo in Bhojanavasthath, e
nativewill be vcry rich and will be honourcdb y scholars. lf
Venus be in Nrilyalipsavasthat,h e native will be skilful in
literature, intelligent, will play musical instrumentsli ke lute,
laber etc., be meritoriqus and very affiuent. lf Venus be in
K 'utukavasthrt,h e native will bee qualt o Lord Indra, will attain
greatnessin  the assembly,b e learned and will have Lakshmi
always rwelling in his abode. If Venusb e in Nidravasths't he
nativew ill be interestedin  servingo thers,w ill blame others,b e
heroic,g arrulousa nd wanderinga ll over the earth.

Notes : Venus in Sayanavasthian  the ascendanwt ill confer
riches;i f in the 7th or in the llth in the saidA vastha,t he native
will be endowed with all kinds of happiness,w ill neverf ace
shortageo f money and will have7  sonsa nd 5 daughters. In
other housesthan the ascendant7, th and lltb, Venusi n Sayana-
vasthaw ill dcstroy the progenyo f the native. lf Venus is in
Upavesanavastbtah,e  native will havea defector injury on the
right side of the body. He will suffer from painso f joints as



474 Brihat parasara Hora Sastra
well. should upavesanavasthao ccur to venus in exaltation
or in own sign, tbe native wilr be endowedw irh ail kinds of
happiness. There will be sure rosso f eye sighti f venus is in
Netrapani Avastha. The l0th house pracemento f venus in
NetrapaniA vasthai s not praiseworthyfo r richesw hile in other
housesth an the ascendantz, th and rOth this wiil bring abundant
wealth apart frorn giving two wives. prakasanaA vasthao f
Venus placed in the 2nd, ,/th, 9th or the ascendanwt ill give
wealtha nd stcrling disposition. And if he be in the lOrh o; in
exaltation or in friendly sign, the native will occupya  high
position with the king. In other housest han these,p rakasa_
vasthao f venus will givem any diseascasn d miseries.. If venus
is in sabhavastlrit he native wilt receive royal favoursa nd be
akin to Kuberai n wcalth. shourdv enus be in sabhavastbian 
an enemy's sign or in aspect to an enemy, it will destroy
everything.N rityalipsavasthoaf  Venusw ill confera  high degree
of learningw hilc Nidravasthar vill causel itigations,d iseases,
disputesa nd povcrty. Kautukavasthao f Venus will give
abundanrt ichcs,w ifc andnumerousc hildren.

qftrreuf<nra) fqm;a: nui nal r
q{.,fq sefr trit ild} qFqqai qr: uil ltl

wrr): qi igntvraei m{trrfir<rfrqrr3ilinI: 
antqmi{ct n a4rril {ilfqqrdt ;rqEqsqquilt : I  i rr

rrqqqTFrri< fqqrEi q(qqt (rrqr rrrqrtir:I 
Tqf atr f(da)n l aaleg g gm-crft+rc l far*f. agq ut  t I rl 
?Tnrgqjrrqqafunrdt qqr at1 gfafaqJqqiqlr 
nfiT{r+q qgt {$rTn:E qq{{il} E<qt{qsilu: l tytl

qAT{- n'}r ;rr;t;rfi<a: $T1qqpTrfri ,'ft< gqfe6r''t1r 
qt qrrl qfieattqqd urqinqai $qrfr niltrr.
BrTqqAqt nwgqa: gx6q?q€;r fagw: r
qqqt ur* gfa fqed+ iq,ir fqqil{qqn{ n t ttrtl

riaTqn'l$r=qqcllia*.ni qrilq Fftrf q fr rqleq r
erilqt ttlEtt fiffiFd riq goff qtql rTQlenlt:t etl



Chapter4 5 475
3rTrr* q?ffiTrrqql wtrqrqqtilit qil ail r
q?Elq rrqi urTqtqfqarfq<fqilq fa: qqr trttqll
ift egfe nqrai *qi $rqfilc lq{ (0; I
igi aq{q?qat ail r\cmf<arfqei qfr: ut terr

aeqfGTrsrqiq ?e aqtilr fmHRe: r
rragcala rl ql* rErdl* wrrgutu {Qol1

nafr mlgm'magqrqfu*qt eguraqdra:r 
ufagdt tg'dlqqTk: mfqeqnqqr .F'qrn;R: u I Rt  tl
frarqi aracrrgi I
qrffidt accferer66l etf,:i l tRRtl

III.I22. EFFECTS OF SATURN'S AVASTHAS AT.
BIRTH.' If Saturni s in Sayanavasthtah,e  nativew ill be troubled
by hungera nd thirst,will incurd iseaseins boyhooda nd latero n
will become wealthy. If Saturn be in Upavesanavasthtah e
native will be troubled greatly by enemies, will contract
dangersw, ill haveu lcers allover the body, be self-respecteadn d
be punishedb y thc king. If Satqrnb e in NetrapanAi vastha,t he
nativew ill be endowedw ith a charmingf cmale,w ealth,r oyal
favour and friends,w ill .havek nowtedgeo f many arts and be an
eloquents peaker. lf Saturn be in Prakasavastha"t,h e native
will be very virtuous, very wealthy, intelligent, sportive,
splendorous,merciful and devoted to Lord Siva. lf Saturn
be in Gamanavasthat,h e native will be very rich, endowed
with sons;will grab enemie'sl ands and be a scholara t royal
court. If Saturn be in Agdmrnavaslha,t he native will be akin
to a donkey( i.e. foolish), bereft of happinessf rom wife and
children,w ill alwaysr oam pitiably without anybody'sp atronage.
If Saturn be in Sabhavrstha,t he irative will have surprising
(i.e. great) possessionso f abundant preciouss tonesa nd gold,
be endowedw ith great judicial (or political)k nowledgea nd be
extremelyb rilliant. If Satuin be in Agomavasth&t he native
will incur diseasesa, nd will not be skilful in earning royal
patronage. If Saturn be in Bhojanavastha,t he native will enjoy
tastes of food, be weak-sighteda nd be fickle.rnindedd ue to
mental delusion. lf Saturn be in Nrityalipavastha, rhe native



476 Brihat Parasara Hora Sostra

will be righteous, extremely opulent, honoured by the king,
bravea nd be heroici n warfield. If Saturnbe Kautohavastha
the native will be endowed with lands and wealth,b e happy,
endowedw ith pleasuretsh rough charming femalesa nd learned
in poetry,a rtse tc. If Saturnbe in Nidravasthat,he nativew ill
be rich, endowedw ith charming virtues, valorous,w ill destroy
evenf iercee nemiesa nd be skilful in seekingp leasuresth rough
harlots.

Notes : If Saturni s in Sayanavasthina the 5th ltouse,t he
native will be endoweC with progeny and be happyi n all
mannersi;f  in the ascendant6, th or 8th, the native will l ive in
alien places,b ev cry poor and peacelessT.h is Avasthat o Saturn
will also caused iseaseosf  the rectum( irrespectiveo f the planet's
placement). Saturn in Upavesanavasthwai ll ever caused iffi'
cultiesf rom the governmentand destructiono f wealth. Saturn
placedi n the 10tho r in the ascendanwt ith NetrapaniAvastha
whenuncheckewd illcausem iseriesin  livelihood;i n the 5th/7th
therew ill be destruct,iono f wealth, wifc and progenya nd in a
houseothert han Ist, 5th and 7th, this Avasthao f Saturnwill
give wealthand happinessfr om all sources. If Prakasanavastba
occurst o Saturn whilc being in the 7th op the 9th, the native
and his entire racc will be "destroyed". $hould Sabhavastha
occur to Saturni n an enemy's signo r witp an aspectf rom an
enemy, there will be absolute destructidn of the native's
possession,B hojanavasthao f Saturn will causedigestived iffi-
culties, piles and eye defects;i f Saturn is in simultaneously
exaltation' or in own sign, the native will enjoy all kinds of
happinessa nd be ever devoid of diseases.K autukavasthao f
Saturni n the 5th/7th/9th will destroye verylhini and will leave
the nativewith diseasesa lone. Should tbis Avas'ha occurt o
Saturni n another house than Sth/?th/9th,t he native will be
favoured by the king, will be very rich, meritorious,s kilful,
happy, learnedand adorable. If Saturn is in Nidravastha,t he
nativewill be opulent, learned, will have two wivesa nd many
male.issuesand be very honourablef or his sterlingness Should
Nidravasthao ccur to Saturn in the l0th house,t here will bc
penury, diseasesi living in alien places and obstruction !o
undertakings at every siep" If he is in an angle or in a trine
or in exaltation.t besee vil effectsw ill not come to pa!s.



Chapter 45 477

qimnll Er+qfi q{q {r{t qt{Trfusi{ vrqd qq€ t

list gtsfr a F;qfiltqt rmrq}uqtfl?qltfrl:l tRlll
sqt{tifiQ rraefa rrq} aEnk qq: qRma: t
qwrffnnta] rdflrff fatq€a ret tQa: tqIE ltRYl'

ieqrqrqql ii rrqa] r'lqq]fedI 
gsrarref<qlqrqi qd irtq. uqqg: lltR{ll
qfilri qsrffii Rqfr: 5fa: qw ryti t
qqlr{frriq}nnfr: €?il faamrrrfr6t 
tr<rfuclFrmTftm qvfrqat ilin q*-
q{fqitrrqrufats*{d} wqlnfe:t tlRqtl
ttni tt tnr 116l rdfi€tFtEtlnn:t 

<r6nrrr$i aitdt €in Straqfarf,;1
gfro, STa: mr{t ;r* qqfil qiiqi ttllcll
qrnqfr rgt qg: qfiea: giwl r<: I
qlrrguuRar;'<1 fqaqtqqqqfta6l:l tRall

*errlanri qrlr ne aera rgved w<nrfa*txil $rr\ t
q{cq?qqrqqJr tqi fccTaq} }fail€Tf(: qrci{5 '{Tiq{l l I Qoll

{ilql q'tqi?fiFi fqfi-d} rgu} q}q I
q-.a{a; fqqTdla: dfgrgc<fwa: tr11  1tt
gafcwmi aql rrqranfufaqaii{ |
tr<].it ftq}rfifadau{qfr ilrr{ llt lRll

. nlg* q qfl trql rrrrr6tt] qrl qh I
r<Ercqil] farri qqktrrqil{T: tttQlll
fqrrqwi q* <rd gurwmgal$ : I
rt'r(nwil;tqq,ft* qtffi agfanaq lltQYll
123.134E. FFECTSO F RAHU'S AVASTHASA T BIRTE :

If Rahu be in sayansvasthat,h e oativew ill experiencem iseries



4?8 Brihat pardsaraH oro Sasta
galore;b ut if Rahui n the srid Avasthab e in TaurusG, emini,
virgo or Aries the nrr-ive wifl rre encowed with wcarth 
grains. and

If Rahu be in upavesanavasthtah e native wi[ be
distrcssed ue to ulcers,b e endowedw ith royl associationh, ighry
honourablea nd ever deviod of financialh appiness. lr n-anu
be in NetrapaniA vestha,t he native will be troubledbt;t;
diseasesw, ill havef ear from wickeclp eoprc,s nakesa nd thleves
and will incur financiald ecline. If Rahu be in prakasavasthr,
the nativew ill acquirea  high position, wiil performa uspicious
acts,w ill obtain elevationo f financiars tate, be highly viituous.
be a chiefi n the king's court, be charmingr ike frcsriryf ormed
clouds (that wilt cause soonr ain) and be very prosperouisn 
foreign places. If Rahu is in Gamanavlsthat he native wit be
endowed with numreous children,b e scholarly,w ealthy,c hari-
tablea nd honouredb y the king. If Rahu i, in'lgnr;;a"th",
the nativew ill be very irritable,b erefto f intelligencea nd wealtb,
crooked,m iserrya nd ribidinous. If Rahu is in sabbavasthr 
nativew ill the

be scholarly,m iserly,a nde ndowed 
wealth .;nt;i;";;;

and happincs.l. lf Rair" be i" ;gama"ivtha stha, 
will the 

be alwayl native
mentally distressed,w iil i"avef ear from 

and litigations enemies
with enemiesb, eb ireft of his own men, 

financial will 
destruction, face

and be craftya nd cmaciated. If Rahu 
in be

BhoJanrvosthat,h e native wiil be distressedw ithout 
dull-witted, food,

b e not bold in his actsa nd be berefto progenic  ,oniug"i 
h 

f
appioess. If Rahu be in Nrityalipsavasthart,  

will r"ou"toiuf "
contracta  greata nd unsubduingd isease.w ill have

eyes a ffiicted
and. fear florp enemiesa nd wi|| decline nnun"i"iiy

righteously. If u nJ
Rahu be in Kautukavasthat,h e native

devoido f a position w ill 
( or be

a place),b e interestcdin  otrr"..' rumai.l
and wiu stear others' wearth. If Rahu be in Nidravastha,ihe
olliy" will be a repositoryo f virtues, be endowed* itt;ift'unj
children,b old, proud and very affuent.

Notes : If Rahu in Sayaoavasthais  in Leo, Virgo 
Taurus, there or

will be ail round happinessw hereasi , irttr.i-rLi,
he is adversew ith this Avastha. iahu'. upavesanavurttu
destroy one's ii li

wealth and will causc difficultiesi n O"V_to-Juy
His Netrapani Avastha 

"{.1i1.. in the ascendanto r in 
ng the 7th

will bri many evitsa nd miseriesw hirei n other housesit  
bring wiil

danger from ani.mals. Rahu in prakasanavasthain  Leo



Chaprcr 45 47g

or in Cancerw ill cause amputation of head; in otber signsi t
givesw ealtha nd royal service. Rahut Sabhavasth;an  tne-Sttr/
l$tb/lst will destroy the native's progenya nd spousea nd will
nrakeh iin fickle-minded. This Avasthai n other housesw ill give
virtues,e cholarshipa nd wealth. With Rahu in the l0th oi in
the 7th Bhojanavasthat he native will 'kill'his wife or he may
abandon her br may not be happy in marricd life, and be
irreligious. Nrityalipsavasthao f Rahu in the ascendantw ill
deprivet he native of his progenic ability while in other houses
this Avastha will give two wives and all kinds of happiness.
Should Rahu be in Kautukavasthain 'a houseo ther than 5th/
7th/lOth, the native will incur manyk indso f miseriesandb e
berefto f spousea nd progeny. Nidravastlrao f Rahu will inflict
utter poverty and make the native wander all over the earth
aimlesslY.

8i $sq fl $i r;qrqi nrf rt r
til uisTk: rqr*qi tqadq nt ltrr
sqtqi Tdl +dl EIrrffiqahq r
uf{fir1nrfiqql1'irT ltflftrd: iltl!,tl
i"q|Fr rt *al irtlq: qqTqeI 
geedffifrra frgnwgnnfi uti\ell
tal sfirrri rfi amq fifqr: tr{r r
fred cqTq'ta lrvqt srftqr] qmRqfi.t:r llell
qt€erqi wnfudggel rT€Ierf:I 
qFsnl :Fqq ERil qnri q q*sq: i l  netl
mqqi rr Tin tgafartlnl q?fHtt: I
T'awtdf q6tif fiqa: qrfa;et: iltlrotl
(crqtqi q* *al qTqrd Eilrfqr: I
Uqurl Frradq qiifaenfennqr:t lvttl
aaTql wi*g: *g, FrTFrFTrndoInq 
rqqlir{f,} 3ei R5frrf"{ffua:r rlvlrr



480 Brihat P(rctsara Hora Sostra

*tri g q* fard qaar qR{lRa: r
qf(al *rr{a'e: tal qqfA tf,nt{ utvlrl
c?qFq.ergil* a} aq|fluqrf qmq}u iq t
gtqw) g<rauT qaTs<rfr'* ?{: lllY'll
ttg*1 n.tg* tal aaqrqrrfil&q: t
TqTqqcAg <nr0 ef{r} xqt wflq rrty{rl
fqrmwi qf H rrur;agd qqir.I 
arargwfaaltq firf,l lqfa crfitnq ulyqtl

I35-146E. FFECTSOF KETU'SAYASTITAS.ATB IRTH:
If Ketu is in Sayanavasthain  Aries, Taurus, Gemini or Virgo,
there will be plentyo f wealth while in others ignsi ncreased
discasewsi ll follow. If Ketu bei n Upavesanavastthean ativewill
sufferf rom ulcersand will havef earf rom enemiesw. indy diseases
snakesa nd thicves. Should K€tu bc in NetrapanAi vaslha,t he
native will contracte yed iseasesa,n d will bavef ear from wicked
people,s nakese, nemiesa nd peopleo f royal t'amily' If Ketu be
in Prakasanavasthath, e native rvill be wealthy,r ighteouswill
live in foreignp laces, be enthusiastiacn d genuinea nd will serve
the king. If Ketu be in Gamanavrsthat,h e native will be
6ndowed with many sons, abundant wealth, be scholarly,
virtuous, charitablea nd be excellenat mongm en. If Kctu be
in Agamanavasthath, e nativewill incur many diseasesw,i ll face
losso f wealth,will hurt (others) with his teeth (q;6qlfil{), bea
talebearerand rvill blameothers. If Ketu be in Sabhavastha,
the nativew ill be garrulous,v eryp roud, miserly,li centiouas nd
skilful in evil brancheso f learning. If Ketu be in Agamavastha,
the native will be a notorioussinner,w ill enteri nto litigations
with his relatives be wicked and troubled by diseaseasn d
enemies. If Ketu be in Bhojanavasthath, e nativew ill always
be distressedwith hunger, penury and diseaseasn d will roam
allovert he earth. Il Ketu be in Nrityallpsavasthath, e native
will be distressedu e to diseasesw, ill havea floral mark on the
eye (i.e. white of the pupil), be impertinent, wicked and
will plan evils. If Ketu be in Kautukavasthat,h e native will
seek union with dancing females( i.e. prostitutes),will suffer
positional displacementw, ill take to evil pathsa nd will roam



Chapter 45 481
an over. If Ketu be in Nidravestbat he natrvew iil bc endowed
with wealth and corns, be virtuous and will ;p;;iil-;i;
soortively.

vtqi laq ! urig nz fauuf;a(t rgT: I
fft{ rtq {s*rri hfq{ir atq'gu, ntvetl

t4T. GENERAL EFFECTS (upto sloka lJrl .. O Brehmin,
if a beneficplanet is in Sayanavastharh, ere will be tienclice ffects
at all times according to the learned.

ffi tg wrig qrrtfm66Gan rifir
aqr gtifdaTdsfqT E" rs.rqtF {qrqqnrtyEtl

148. Ifa malefic is in Bhojanavasthae, verything(rehted
to thc housec oncerned) wiil be destroyeda nd there iioo o*a
of a secondt hought.

ffi q qil nqt wrmq{ttrf qidr
qfr wrvwfqs a) ir {d q qonn it tyetl

149. Should a malefic in the 7th be in Nidravartha auspi.
cious effects will foilow, provided there is no aspectf r; 
malefic. iltgt-i",

:
gaFmi frqe: q|ql fu nqisR qTr
irr {{ qimq ils" sTqtf {qnlnui{oul

150. Declare without a secondt hought auspiciouse ffects
following the location of a malefic in the 5th but witb Nidra-
vastha or Sayanavastba.

1gr:rnftq6: qrfr fM mislq il,
f,irf ilt|Tlsq{el: I{rrfrqir: qT?rGwnrtTlt ltl

lst. Untinely death due to royal wrath will oomc to
pasri f thcrc ir a malefic in the 8th in Nidrarasthao r Sayana-
vartba.

qQriw 11il: !fif qR dfir* r
ntr g qTtl rR |tf,.trl q Friq{rrn ttltl



492 bthat Parasara Hora Sastla

152. lf in the above case there be a benefic aspecto r
conjunction, tbe said (untimely) death will be in the river
Ganges,i  e. Gangeticb elt. shrinese tc.

6{TqrA $fl q1q $ai q}qisfq il |
irfl '6{f"nr: tnnl;il9:q5lirTqfr: llltlll

153. If therc be a malefici n the l0th housei n Sayanao r
Bhojanavastha,t he native will facem any miserieso n account
of his own deeds.

{wcQ frrnmq: qilgt q rtrdi t
.{tq <rcfiq: Gnhfqttri fao'lqq llt{vll

154. O excellcnto f the Brahmins, doubtlesslya  Rajayoga
rill come to possi f thc Moon is in the l0th in Kautukavastha
or Prakasanavastha"

rilsftfimiq ililat5ar llfiqlqq I
qF *q *a.{ gqtqrig faqt nt{ttl

155. Thus the good and bad effects be guesseda ssessing
thc etrength and wcakness of the planets concerning all tho
Bhavcr.

o3
fTo bc cncMcdJ

,ear  Read,ef ,

e  a re  g lad  you  a re  read lng  th l s  Un lque  Book .
ome o the r  rena ln lng  chap te rs rwh lch  Con ta ln  ve r
mpor tan t  maber la1 ,  a re  g l  r ren  l n  1bs  I f  nc l  pa r t .
lease wr lbe for  your  c<rpy < l f  bhc sa 'ne.

RANJAN PUBLICATIONS
15 ,Ansar l  Roqd ,  Darya  GanJ ,

New De1hl -11 0002 ( INDIA)



483
hnnlru,

Page Line For Read
l 8  26 AD 72 AD 78
57 23 257 59sh475 Vigh 257d 59gh4 7.SV igh
60 20 4h 2m 4h26m
79 22 r r23 r t25

t2r 23 tilour valour
197, I physicallpm atiny physicallym ating
2r8 t4. downfull downfall
22t 7 blies liss
222 '19 b

co-bron coborn
236 t4 progery prdgeny
239 20 vives vices
u9 l8 splenorous splendorous
313 Rahu in Gemini

(in the chart)
358 19 Gcda Gada
376 25 Jakara Jataka
382 19 thesc the
400 30 If Amatya If Atma
431 23 another ioother in
432 last but one 180 108
450 l0 Vikala Dukkhita, 
454 Vikala

7 stars Star_ 
456 15 ( and lr T a n d g
462 13 if it

A GlimPseo f

KERALA ASTROLOGY -o 'P V' erma
The present work A Glimpse rs t

9f ..Ke3la-,!s^trology 
condensation of three ieco!niseO Kerala classrcs Kerala

Jyo,tisna, Kerala sutra and Gopata Ratnakara.whicha re untque

in their own way & speaKo ut t'he essential' p'lt?P]::,"1f:t:l:
istrotogy. Wasuppbseo urr eadersw illb e enl-ig htenebd. y^these
il luminatingpeartsKoEt RAtoo t*oton" n:t, l- t